
THE
VVO R K S OF
JOHN
V O L U M E X
Letters, Essays, Dialogs and Addresses
Z O N D E R V A N P U B L IS H IN G H O U S E
G r and R a pids C-6 Michigan
This edition of the complete and unabridged
THE WoRks of JoHN WESLEY is reproduced
by the photo offset process from the authorized
edition published by the Wesleyan Conference
Office in London, England, in 1872.
Lithographed in the United States of America
') * P- -
* t - *
2 -7 - CON TENTS
/ 2. , - 4
V. 7)•
I. Page.
A Letter to the Reverend Doctor Conyers Middleton
Occasioned by his late “Free Inquiry.” . . . . . . . . . J
II.
A Letter to a Roman Catholic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80
III.
A Roman Catechism, faithfully drawn out of the allowed
writings of the Church of Rome: With a Reply
thereto . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86
SECTION I.
of THE CHURCH, AND RULE OF FAITH . . . . . . . 87
SECTION II.
OF REPENTANCE AND OBEDIENCE . . . . . . . . . . . 94
SECTION III.
OF DIVINE WORSHIP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
SECTION IV.
OF THE SACRAMENTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . I 12
Of Baptism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114
The Exorcism of the Salt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 116
Of Confirmation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 116
C/ the Eucharist . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 117
Of Penance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .- - - - - 123
The Sacrament of Extreme Unction . . . . . . . . 125
Of the Sacrament of Orders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 126
Of the Sacrament of Marriage . . . . . . . . . . . . 127
State University of lowa
L. BRARIES
iv CoNTENTS.
IV.
Page.
A Short Method of converting all the Roman Catholics
in the kingdom of Ireland: Humbly proposed to the
Bishops and Clergy of that kingdom . . . . . . . . . . . 129
V
The Advantage of the Members of the Church of Eng
land over those of the Church of Rome. . . . . . . . . ... 133
VI.
Popery Calmly Considered . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14C.
SECTION I.
oF THE CHURCH, AND THE RULE OF FAITH. . . . 14(
SECTION II.
OF REPENTANCE AND OBEDIENCE . . . . . . . . . . . 143
SECTION III.
OF DIVINE WORSHIP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 145
SECTION IV.
OF THE SACRAMENTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 149
VII.
A Letter to the Printer of “The Public Advertiser:”
Occasioned by the late Act passed in favour of
Popery. To which is added, A Defence of it, in
Two Letters to the Editors of “The Freeman’s
Journal,” Dublin. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 159
LETTER. I.
FIRST LETTER TO THE EDITORS OF “THE FREE
MAN's JourNAL,” DUBLIN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 162
LETTER II.
SECOND LETTER TO DITTO. . . . . . . . . • * * * * * * * 166
VIII.
A Disavowal of persecuting Papists. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 173
CONTENTS, V
IX. Page.
The Origin of Image-Worship among Christians . . . . . . . 175
X.
A Letter to a Person lately joined with the people called
Quakers : In answer to a Letter wrote by him . . . . . 177
XI.
A Treatise on Baptism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 188
XII.
An Extract from “A Short View of the Difference be
tween the Moravian Brethren, (so called,) and the
Rev. Mr. John and Charles Wesley.” . . . . . . . . . . 201
XIII.
Predestination Calmly Considered . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 204
XIV.
A Dialogue between a Predestinarian and his Friend . . . 259
XV.
A Dialogue between an Antinomian and his Friend. . . . . 266
XVI.
A Second Dialogue between an Antinomian and his Friend 276
XVII.
Serious Thoughts upon the Perseverance of the Saints . . 284
XVIII.
A sufficient Answer to “Letters to the Author of ‘Theron
and Aspasio:’” In a Letter to the Author . . . . . . . 298
XIX.
A Letter to a Gentleman at Bristol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 306
Wi CoNTENTS.
XX. Page.
Thoughts on the Imputed Righteousness of Christ . . . . . . 312
XXI
Preface to a Treatise on Justification, extracted from
Mr. John Goodwin. Wherein all that is personal
in Letters just published under the name of the
Rev. Mr. Hervey is answered . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 316
XXII.
Some Remarks on “A Defence of the Preface to the
Edinburgh edition of Aspasio Vindicated.” . . . . . . . 346
XXIII.
The question, “What is an Arminian 2” answered. By
a Lover of Free Grace . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 358
XXIV.
Thoughts upon God’s Sovereignty. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 361
XXV.
A Blow at the Root; or, Christ stabbed in the House of
his Friends. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 364
XXVI.
The Consequence proved . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 370
XXVII.
Some Remarks on Mr. Hill’s “Review of all the Doc
trines taught by Mr. John Wesley”. . . . . . . . . . . . 374
XXVIII.
Some Remarks on Mr. Hill’s “Farrago Double Dis
tilled.” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 415
XXIX.
An Answer to Mr. Rowland Hill's Tract, entitled “Im
posture Detected.” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 446
CONTENTS. vii
XXX. Page.
Thoughts concerning Gospel Ministers . . . . . . . . . . . . . 455
XXXI.
Thoughts upon Necessity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .• * * * * * * 457
XXXII.
A Thought on Necessity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 474
XXXIII.
An Address to the Clergy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 480
XXXIV.
A Letter to the Rev. Mr. Toogood, of Exeter: Occasioned
by his “Dissent from the Church of England fully
Justified.” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 501
XXXV.
Serious Thoughts concerning Godfathers and Godmothers. 506
XXXVI.
Thoughts on the Consecration of Churches and Burial
Grounds . . . . . . . . . . .• • e • * * * * * * * * * * * * * * , 509
A LETTER
To
THE REVEREND DR. CONYERS MIDDLETON.
OCCASIONED BY HIS LATE * FREE INQUIRY.”
January 4, 1748-9.
REVEREND SIR,
1. IN your late “Inquiry,” you endeavour to prove,
First, that there were no miracles wrought in the primitive
Church: Secondly, that all the primitive Fathers were fools
or knaves, and most of them both one and the other. And it is
easy to observe, the whole tenor of your argument tends to
prove, Thirdly, that no miracles were wrought by Christ or
his Apostles; and, Fourthly, that these too were fools or
knaves, or both.
2. I am not agreed with you on any of these heads. My
reasons I shall lay before you, in as free a manner, though not
in so smooth or laboured language, as you have laid yours
before the world.
3. But I have neither inclination nor leisure to follow you,
step by step, through three hundred and seventy-three quarto
pages. I shall therefore set aside all I find in your work which
does not touch the merits of the cause; and likewise contract
the question itself to the three first centuries. For I have no
more to do with the writers or miracles of the fourth, than
with those of the fourteenth, century.
4. You will naturally ask, “Why do you stop there?
What reason can you give for this? If you allow miracles
before the empire became Christian, why not afterwards too?”
I answer, Because, “after the empire became Christian,”
(they are your own words,) “a general corruption both of faith
and morals infected the Christian Church; which, by that
revolution, as St. Jerome says, “lost as much of her virtue, as
It had gained of wealth and power.’” (Page 123.) And this
2 LETTER, TO
very reason St. Chrysostom himself gave in the words you
have afterwards cited: “There are some who ask, Why are
not miracles performed still? Why are there no persons who
raise the dead and cure diseases?” To which he replies, that
it was owing to the want of faith, and virtue, and piety in
those times.
1. You begin your preface by observing, that the “Inquiry”
was intended to have been published some time ago; but, upon
reflection, you resolved to “give out, first, some sketch of what
you was projecting;” (page l;) and accordingly “published
the ‘Introductory Discourse,’” by itself, though “foreseeing
it would encounter all the opposition that prejudice, bigotry,
and superstition are ever prepared to give to all inquiries” of
this nature. (Page 2.) But it was your “comfort, that this
would excite candid inquirers to weigh the merit and conse
quences of it.” (Page 3.)
2. The consequences of it are tolerably plain, even to free
the good people of England from all that prejudice, bigotry,
and superstition, vulgarly called Christianity. But it is not so
plain, that “this is the sole expedient which can secure the
Protestant religion against the efforts of Rome.” (Ibid.) It
may be doubted, whether Deism is the sole expedient to secure
us against Popery. For some are of opinion, there are persons
in the world who are neither Deists nor Papists.
3. You open the cause artfully enough, by a quotation from
Mr. Locke. (Page 4.) But we are agreed to build our faith
on no man’s authority. His reasons will be considered in
their place.
“Those who have written against his and your opinion,”
you say, “have shown great eagerness, but little knowledge
of the question: Urged by the hopes of honours, and prepared
to fight for every establishment that offers such pay to its
defenders.” (Page 5.) I have not read one of these; yet I
would fain believe, that neither the hope of honour, nor the
desire of pay, was the sole, or indeed the main, motive that
urged either them or you to engage in writing.
But I grant they are overseen, if they argue against you by
citing “the testimonies of the ancient Fathers;” (page 6;)
seeing they might easily perceive you pay no more regard to
these than to the Evangelists or Apostles. Neither do I
commend them if they “insinuate jealousies of consequences
dangerous to Christianity.” (Ibid.) Why they should
THE REV. DR. MIDDLETON. 3
insinuate these, I cannot conceive: I need not insinuate that
the sun shines at noon-day. You have “opened too great a glare
to the public,” (page 7) to leave them any room for such insinu
ation. Though, to save appearances, you gravely declare still,
“Were my argument allowed to be true, the credit of the gospel
miracles could not, in any degree, be shaken by it.” (Page 6.)
4. So far is flourish. Now we come to the point: “The
present question,” you say, “depends on the joint credibility
of the facts, and of the witnesses who attest them, especially.”
on the former. For, “if the facts be incredible, no testimony
can alter the nature of things.” (Page 9.) All this is most
true. You go on: “The credibility of facts lies open to the
trial of our reason and senses. But the credibility of witnesses
depends on a variety of principles wholly concealed from us.
And though in many cases it may reasonably be presumed,
yet in none can it be certainly known.” (Page 10.) Sir, will
you retract this, or defend it? If you defend, and can prove,
as well as assert it, then farewell the credit of all history, not
only sacred but profane. If “the credibility of witnesses,” of
all witnesses, (for you make no distinction,) depends, as you
peremptorily affirm, “on a variety of principles wholly concealed
from us;” and, consequently, “though it may be presumed in
many cases, yet can be certainly known in none;” then it is
plain, all the history of the Bible is utterly precarious and
uncertain; then I may indeed presume, but cannot certainly
know, that Jesus of Nazareth ever was born; much less that
he healed the sick, and raised either Lazarus or himself from
the dead. Now, Sir, go and declare again how careful you
are for “the credit of the gospel miracles !”
5. But for fear any (considering how “frank and open” your
nature is, and how “warmly disposed to speak what you take
to be true”) (page 7) should fancy you meant what you said in
this declaration, you take care to inform them soon after:
“The whole which the wit of man can possibly discover, either
of the ways or will of the Creator, must be acquired by
attending seriously” (to what? to the Jewish or Christian
Revelation? No; but) “to that revelation which he made
of himself from the beginning, in the beautiful fabric of this
visible world.” (Page 22.)
6. I believe your opponents will not hereafter urge you,
either with that passage from St. Mark, or any other from
Scripture. At least, I will not, unless I forget myself; as I
4. LETTER TO
observe you have done just now. For you said but now,
“Before we proceed to examine testimonies for the decision of
this dispute, our first care should be, to inform ourselves of the
nature of those miraculous powers which are the subject of it,
as they are represented to us in the history of the gospel.”
(Page 10.) Very true; “this should be our first care.” I was
therefore all attention to hear your account of “the nature of
those powers, as they are represented to us in the gospel.”
But, alas! you say not a word more about it; but slip away to
those “zealous champions who have attempted” (bold men as
they are) “to refute the ‘Introductory Discourse.’” (Page 11.)
Perhaps you will say, “Yes, I repeat that text from St.
Mark.” You do; yet not describing the nature of those
powers; but only to open the way to “one of your antago
mists;” (page 12;) of whom you yourself affirm, that “not
one of them seems to have spent a thought in considering
those powers as they are set forth in the New Testament.”
(Page 11.) Consequently, the bare repeating that text does
not prove you (any more than them) to have “spent one
thought upon the subject.”
7. From this antagonist you ramble away to another; after
a long citation from whom, you subjoin: “It being agreed then
that, in the original promise, there is no intimation of any par
ticular period, to which their continuance was limited.” (Pages
13, 14.) Sir, you have lost your way. We have as yet nothing
to do with their continuance. “For till we have learned from
those sacred records” (I use your own words) “what they
were, and in what manner exerted by the Apostles, we cannot
form a proper judgment of those evidences which are brought
either to confirm or confute their continuance in the Church;
and must consequently dispute at random, as chance or preju
dice may prompt us, about things unknown to us.” (Page 11.)
Now, Sir, if this be true, (as without doubt it is,) then it
necessarily follows, that, seeing from the beginning of your book
to the end, you spend not one page to inform either yourself
or your readers concerning the nature of these miraculous
powers, “as they are represented to us in the history of the
gospel;” you dispute throughout the whole “atrandom, as chance
or prejudice prompts you, about things unknown to you.”
8. Your reply to “the adversaries of your scheme,” (pages
15–27,) I may let alone for the present; and the rather,
because the arguments used therein will occur again and again
THE REV. D.R. MIDDLETON. 5
Only I would here take notice of one assertion, “that the
miraculous powers conferred on the Apostles themselves were
imparted just at the moment of their exertion, and withdrawn
again as soon as those particular occasions were served.”
(Page 23.) You should not have asserted this, be it true or
false, without some stronger proof. “This, I say, is evident,”
(Ibid.,) is not a sufficient proof; nor, “A treatise is prepared
on that subject.” (Page 24.) Neither is it proved by that
comment of Grotius on our Lord's promise,” which, literally
translated, runs thus: “To every believer there was then
given some wonderful power, which was to exert itself, not
indeed always, but when there was occasion.”
9. But waving this, I grant “the single point in dispute is,
whether the testimony of the Fathers be a sufficient ground
to believe, that miraculous gifts subsisted at all after the days
of the Apostles.” (Page 27.) But with this you interweave
another question, whether the Fathers were not all fools or
knaves. In treating of which, you strongly intimate, –First,
that such gifts did never subsist; and, Secondly, that the
Apostles were equally wise and good with the “wonder
workers” (your favourite term) that followed them.
When therefore you add, “My opinion is this, that, after
our Lord’s ascension, the extraordinary gifts he had promised
were poured out on the Apostles, and the other primary
instruments of planting the gospel, in order to enable them
to overrule the inveterate prejudices both of the Jews and
Gentiles, and to bear up against the discouraging shocks of
popular rage and persecution;” (page 28;) I look upon all
this to be mere grimace. You believe not one word of what
you say. You cannot possibly, if you believe what you said
before. For who can believe both the sides of a contradiction?
10. However, I will suppose you do believe it, and will
argue with you from your own words. But first let us have a
few more of them: “In process of time, as miraculous powers
began to be less and less wanted, so they began gradually to
decline, till they were finally withdrawn.” (Page 29.) “And
this may probably be thought to have happened while some
of the Apostles were still living.”
These were given, you say, to the first planters of the
* Non omnibus omnia-ita tamen cuilibet credenti tune data sit admirabilis
Jacultas, quae se, non semper Quidem, sed dalá occasione explicaret.-GROTI Us
in Marcum xvi. 17.
6 LETTER. To
gospel, “in order to enable them to overrule the inveterate
prejudices both of Jews and Gentiles, and to bear up against
the shocks of persecution.” Thus far we are agreed. They
were given for these ends. But if you allow this, you cannot
suppose, consistently with yourself, that they were withdrawn
till these ends were fully answered. So long, therefore, as
those prejudices subsisted, and Christians were exposed to the
shocks of persecution, you cannot deny but there was the
same occasion for those powers to be continued, as there was
for their being given at first. And this, you say, is “a
postulatum which all people will grant, that they continued
as long as they were necessary to the Church.” (Page 11.)
11. Now, did those prejudices cease, or was persecution at
an end, while some of the Apostles were still living? You
have yourself abundantly shown they did not. You know
there was as sharp persecution in the third century, as there
was in the first, while all the Apostles were living. And with
regard to prejudices, you have industriously remarked, that
“the principal writers of Rome, who make any mention of
the Christians, about the time of Trajan, speak of them as a
set of despicable, stubborn, and even wicked enthusiasts;”
(page 193;) that “Suetonius calls them “a race of men of a
new and mischievous superstition;’” (page 194;) and that
“Tacitus, describing the horrible tortures which they suffered
under Nero, says, “They were detested for their flagitious
practices; possessed with an abominable superstition; and
condemned, not so much for their supposed crime of firing
the city, as from the hatred of all mankind.’” (Ibid.)
And “their condition,” you say, “continued much the
same, till they were established by the civil power; during
all which time they were constantly insulted and calumniated
by their heathen adversaries, as a stupid, credulous, impious
sect, the very scum of mankind.” (Page 195.) In a word,
both with regard to prejudice and persecution, I read in your
following page:
“The heathen magistrates would not give themselves the
trouble to make the least inquiry into their manners or
doctrines; but condemned them for the mere name, without
examination or trial; treating a Christian of course as guilty
of every crime, as an enemy of the gods, emperors, laws, and
of nature itself.” (Page 196.)
12. If then the end of those miraculous powers was, “to
THE REV. DR. MI1)DLETON. 7
overcome inveterate prejudices, and to enable the Christians
to bear up against the shocks of persecution,” how can you
possibly conceive that those powers should cease while some
of the Apostles were living? With what colour can you assert,
that they were less wanted for these ends, in the second and
third, than in the Apostolic, age? With what shadow of
reason can you maintain, that (if they ever subsisted at all)
they were finally withdrawn before Christianity was established
by the civil power? Then indeed these ends did manifestly
cease; persecution was at an end; and the inveterate prejudices
which had so long obtained were in great measure rooted up;
another plain reason why the powers which were to balance
these should remain in the Church so long, and no longer.
13. You go on to acquaint us with the excellences of your
performance. “The reader,” you say, “will find in these
sheets none of those arts which are commonly employed by
disputants to perplex a good cause, or to palliate a bad one;
no subtile refinements, forced constructions, or evasive dis
tinctions; but plain reasoning, grounded on plain facts, and
published with an honest and disinterested view to free the
minds of men from an inveterate imposture. I have shown
that the ancient Fathers, by whom that delusion was imposed,
were extremely credulous and superstitious; possessed with
strong prejudices, and scrupling no art or means by which
they might propagate the same.” (Page 31.) Surely, Sir,
you add the latter part of this paragraph, on purpose to
confute the former; for just here you use one of the unfairest
arts which the most dishonest disputant can employ, in
endeavouring to forestall the judgment of the reader, and to
prejudice him against those men on whom he ought not to
pass any sentence before he has heard the evidence.
1. In the beginning of your “Introductory Discourse,”
you declare the reasons which moved you to publish it. One
of these, you say, was the late increase of Popery in this
kingdom; (page 41;) chiefly occasioned, as you suppose, by
the confident assertions of the Romish emissaries, that there
has been a succession of miracles in their Church from the
apostolic to the present age. To obviate this plea, you would
“settle some rule of discerning the true from the false; so
as to give a reason for admitting the miracles of one age, and
rejecting those of another.” (Page 44.)
2. This has a pleasing sound, and is extremely well imagined
8 LETTER, TO
to prejudice a Protestant reader in your favour. You then
slide with great art into your subject: “This claim of a
miraculous power, now peculiar to the Church of Rome, was
asserted in all Christian countries till the Reformation.”
(Ibid.) But then “the cheat was detected:” (Page 45:)
Nay, and men began to “suspect that the Church had long
been governed by the same arts.” “For, it was easy to
trace them up to the primitive Church, though not to fix
the time when the cheat began; to show how long after the
days of the Apostles the miraculous gifts continued in the
Church.” (Page 46.) However, it is commonly believed,
that they continued till Christianity was the established religion.
Some indeed extend them to the fourth and fifth centuries;
(page 50;) but these, you say, betray the Protestant cause.
(Page 51.) “For in the third, fourth, and fifth, the chief
corruptions of Popery were introduced, or at least the seeds
of them sown. By these I mean, monkery; the worship
of relics; invocation of saints; prayers for the dead; the
superstitious use of images, of the sacraments, of the sign
of the cross, and of the consecrated oil.” (Page 52.)
3. I have nothing to do with the fourth or fifth century.
But to what you allege in support of this charge, so far as it
relates to the third century, I have a few things to reply.
And, First, you quote not one line from any Father in the
third century, in favour of monkery, the worship of relics, the
invocation of saints, or the superstitious use either of images
or consecrated oil. How is this, Sir? You brought eight
accusations at once against the Fathers of the third, as well
as the following centuries: And as to five of the eight, when
we call for the proof, you have not one word to say ! As to the
sixth, you say, “In the sacrament of the Eucharist, several
abuses were introduced.” (Page 57.) You instance, first, in
mixing the wine with water. But how does it appear that this
was any abuse at all? or, that “Irenaeus declared it to have
been taught as well as practised by our Saviour?” (Ibid.,
The words you quote to prove this, do not prove it at all,
they simply relate a matter of fact: “Taking the bread, he
confessed it to be his body; and the mixed cup, he affirmed
it was his blood.” * You cannot be ignorant of this fact,
that the cup used after the paschal supper was always mixed
* Accipiens panem, suum corpus esse confitebatur; et temperamentum calicis
suum sanguinem confirmavit.
THE REV. DR. MIDDLETON. 9
with water. But “Cyprian declared this mixture to have
been enjoined to himself by a divine revelation.” (Page 58.)
If he did, that will not prove it to be an abuse: So that you
are wide of the point still. You instance next in their sending
the bread to the sick; which (as well as the mixture) is
mentioned by Justin Martyr. This fact, likewise, we allow;
but you have not proved it to be an abuse. I grant, that,
near an hundred years after, some began to have a supersti
tious regard for this bread. But that in “Tertullian's days it
was carried home and locked up as a divine treasure,” I call
upon you to prove; as also that infant communion was an
abuse; or the styling it “the sacrifice of the body of Christ.”
(Page 59.) I believe the offering it up for the Martyrs was an
abuse; and that this, with the superstitious use of the sign
of the cross, were, if not the earliest of all, yet as early as
any which crept into the Christian Church.
4. It is certain, “praying for the dead was common in the
second century.” (Page 60.) You might have said, “And in
the first also;” seeing that petition, “Thy kingdom come,”
manifestly concerns the saints in paradise, as well as those upon
earth. But it is far from certain, that “the purpose of this
was to procure relief and refreshment to the departed souls in
some intermediate state of expiatory pains;” or that “this was
the general opinion of those times.”
5. As to the “consecrated oil,” (page 63) you seem entirely
to forget that it was neither St. Jerome, nor St. Chrysostom,
but St. James, who said, “Is any sick among you? Let him
send for the Elders of the Church; and let them pray over
him, anointing him with oil, in the name of the Lord: And
the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise
him up.” (Chap. v. 14, 15.)
The sum is: You have charged the Fathers of the third
century with eight of the chief corruptions of Popery:
(1) Monkery; (2.) The worship of relics; (3.) Invocation
of saints; (4.) The superstitious use of images; (5.) Of the
consecrated oil; (6.) Of the sacraments; (7.) Of the sign
of the cross; (8.) Praying for the dead.
And what is all this heavy charge come to at last? Why,
just thus much: Some of them, in the beginning of the third
century, did superstitiously use the sign of the cross; and
others, in the middle of that century, offered up the Eucharist
for the Martyrs on their annual festivals; though how you make
IO LETTER. To
this “the superstitious use of the sacraments,” I know not, or
how these come to be the “chief corruptions of Popery.”
Praying thus far for the dead, “that God would shortly
accomplish the number of his elect and hasten his kingdom,”
and anointing the sick with oil, you will not easily prove to be
any corruptions at all.
As to monkery, the worship of relics, invocation of saints,
and the superstitious use of images, you have not even
attempted to prove that these Fathers were guilty: So that, for
aught appears, you might as well have charged them on the
Apostles. “Yet it is no more,” you solemnly assure us, “than
what fact and truth oblige you to say!” (Page 65.) When I
meet with any of these assurances for the time to come, I
shall remember to stand upon my guard.
6. In the following pages you are arguing against the
miracles of the fourth and fifth century. After which you add:
“But if these must be rejected, where then are we to stop?
And to what period must we confine ourselves? This, indeed,
is the grand difficulty, and what has puzzled all the other
Doctors who have considered the same question before me.”
(Page 71.) Sir, your memory is short. In this very Discourse
you yourself said just the contrary. You told us awhile ago,
that, not only Dr. Marshall, Dr. Dodwell, and Archbishop Tillot
son, but the generality of the Protestant Doctors, were agreed
to what period they should confine themselves; believing that
miracles subsisted through the three first centuries, and ceased
in the beginning of the fourth. (Page 46, et seq.)
7. However, that none of them may ever be puzzled any
more, you will “lay down some general principles, which may
lead us to a more rational solution of the matter than any that
has hitherto been offered.” (Ibid.) Here again I was all
attention. And what did the mountain bring forth? What
are these general principles, preceded by so solemn a declara
tion, and laid down for thirteen pages together? (Pages 71
—84.) Why, they are dwindled down into one, “that the
forged miracles of the fourth century taint the credit of all the
later miracles !” I should desire you to prove, that the
miracles of the fourth century were all forged, but that it is
not material to our question.
8. But you endeavour to show it is: “For that surprising
confidence,” you say, “with which the Fathers of the fourth
age have affirmed as true what they themselves had forged,
ThE REV. DR. MIDDLETON. 11
or, at least, knew to be forged,” (a little more proof of that,)
“makes us suspect, that so bold a defiance of truth could not
become general at once, but must have been carried gradually
to that height by custom and the example of former times.”
(Page 84.) It does not appear that it did become general till
long after the fourth century. And as this supposition is
not sufficiently proved, the inference from it is nothing worth.
9. You say, Secondly, “This age, in which Christianity
was established, had no occasion for any miracles. They
would not, therefore, begin to forge miracles at a time when
there was no particular temptation to it.” (Ibid.) Yes, the
greatest temptation in the world, if they were such men as you
suppose. If they were men that would scruple no art or
means to enlarge their own credit and authority, they would
naturally “begin to forge miracles” at that time when real
miracles were no more.
10. You say, Thirdly, “The later Fathers had equal
piety with the earlier, but more learning and less credulity.
If these, then, be found either to have forged miracles them
selves, or propagated what they knew to be forged, or to have
been deluded by the forgeries of others, it must excite the same
suspicion of their predecessors.” (Page 85.) I answer, (1.) It
is not plain that the later Fathers had equal piety with the
earlier: Nor, (2.) That they had less credulity. It seems,
some of them had much more: Witness Hilarion’s camel, and
smelling a devil or a sinner; though even he was not so quick
scented as St. Pachomius, who (as many believe to this day)
could “smell a heretic at a mile’s distance.” (Free Inquiry,
pages 89,90.) But if, (3.) The earlier Fathers were holier
than the later, they were not only less likely to delude others,
but (even on Plato's supposition) to be deluded themselves:
For they would have more assistance from God.
11. But you say, Fourthly, “The earlier ages of the Church
were not purer than the later. Nay, in some respects they
were worse. For there never was any age in which so many
rank heresies were professed, or so many spurious books forged
and published, under the names of Christ and his Apostles;
several of which are cited by the most eminent Fathers of
those ages, as of equal authority with the Scriptures. And
none can doubt but those who would forge, or make use of
forged books, would make use of forged miracles.” (Introd.
Disc., pages 86, 87.)
12 LETTER, TO
I answer, (1.) It is allowed that before the end of the
third century the Church was greatly degenerated from its first
purity. Yet I doubt not, (2.) But abundantly more rank
heresies have been publicly professed in many later ages; but
they were not publicly protested against, and therefore
historians did not record them. (3.) You cannot but know it
has always been the judgment of learned men, (which you are
at liberty to refute if you are able,) that the far greater part of
those spurious books have been forged by heretics; and that
many more were compiled by weak, well-meaning men, from
what had been orally delivered down from the Apostles.
But, (4.) There have been in the Church from the beginning
men who had only the name of Christians. And these,
doubtless, were capable of pious frauds, so called. But this
ought not to be charged upon the whole body. Add to this,
(5.) What is observed by Mr. Daillé: “I impute a great part
of this mischief to those men who, before the invention of
printing, were the transcribers and copiers out of manuscripts.
We may well presume that these men took the same liberty in
forging as St. Jerome complains they did in corrupting
books; especially since this course was beneficial to them,
which the other was not.” Much more to the same effect we
have in his treatise “Of the Right Use of the Fathers,” Part
I., chap. iii. N.B. These transcribers were not all Christians;
no, not in name; perhaps few, if any of them, in the first
century. (6.) By what evidences do you prove, that these
spurious books “are frequently cited by the most eminent
Fathers, as not only genuine, but of equal authority with the
Scriptures themselves?” or, Lastly, that they either forged
these books themselves, or made use of what they knew to be
forged ? These things also you are not to take for granted,
but to prove, before your argument can be of force.
12. We are come at last to your general conclusion: “There
is no sufficient reason to believe, that any miraculous powers
subsisted in any age of the Church after the times of the
Apostles.” (Page 91.)
But pretended miracles, you say, arose thus: “As the high
authority of the apostolic writings excited some of the most
learned Christians” (prove that !) “to forge books under their
names; so the great fame of the apostolic miracles would
naturally excite some of the most crafty, when the Apostles
were dead, to attempt some juggling tricks in imitation of them.
THE REV, DR, MIDDLETON, 13
And when these artful pretenders had maintained their ground
through the first three centuries, the leading Clergy of the
fourth understood their interest too well to part with the old
plea of miraculous gifts.” (Page 92.)
Round assertions indeed! But surely, Sir, you do not
think that reasonable men will take these for proofs You
are here advancing a charge of the blackest nature. But
where are your vouchers? Where are the witnesses to support
it? Hitherto you have not been able to produce one, through
a course of three hundred years; unless you bring in those
Heathen, of whose senseless, shameless prejudices you have
yourself given so clear an account.
But you designed to produce your witnesses in the “Free
Inquiry,” a year or two after the “Introductory Discourse”
was published. So you condemn them first, and try them
afterwards: You will pass sentence now, and hear the evidence
by and by A genuine specimen of that “impartial regard
to truth,” which you profess upon all occasions.
13. Another instance of this is in your marginal note:
“The primitive Christians were perpetually reproached for
their gross credulity.” They were; but by whom? Why,
by Jews and Heathens. Accordingly, the two witnesses you
produce here are Celsus the Jew, and Julian the apostate.
But lest this should not suffice, you make them confess the
charge: “The Fathers,” your words are, “defend them
selves by saying, that they did no more than the philosophers
had always done: That Pythagoras's precepts were incul
cated with an ipse divit, and they found the same method
useful with the vulgar.” (Page 93.) And is this their whole
defence? Do the very men to whom you refer, Origen and
Arnobius, in the very tracts to which you refer, give no other
answer than this argument ad hominem? Stand this as
another genuine proof of Dr. Middleton’s candour and
impartiality |
14. A further proof of your “frank and open nature,” and
of your “contenting yourself with the discharge of your own
conscience, by a free declaration of your real sentiments,”
(page 40,) I find in the very next page. Here you solemnly
declare: “Christianity is confirmed by the evidence of such
miracles as, of all others on record, are the least liable to excep
tion, and carry the clearest marks of their sincerity; being
wrought by Christ and his Apostles for an end so great, so
14 LETTER. To
important, as to be highly worthy the interposition of the
Deity; wrought by mean and simple men, and delivered by
eye-witnesses, whose characters exclude the suspicion of
fraud.” (Page 94.) Sir, do you believe one word of what
you so solemnly declare? You have yourself declared the
contrary. But if you do not, where shall we have you? Or
how can we believe you another time? How shall we know,
I will not say, when you speak truth, but when you would
have us think you do? By what criterion shall we distinguish
between what is spoken in your real, and what in your
personated, character? how discern when you speak as Dr.
Middleton, and when as the public librarian?
15. You go on: “By granting the Romanists but a single
age of miracles after the Apostles, we shall be entangled in
difficulties, whence we can never extricate ourselves till we
allow the same powers to the present age.” (Page 96.) I will
allow them, however, three ages of miracles, and let them
make what advantage of it they can.
You proceed: “If the Scriptures are a complete rule,”
(I reject the word sufficient, because it is ambiguous,) “we do
not want the Fathers as guides, or, if clear, as interpreters. An
esteem for them has carried many into dangerous errors; the
neglect of them can have no ill consequences.” (Page 97.)
I answer, (1.) The Scriptures are a complete rule of faith
and practice; and they are clear in all necessary points. And
yet their clearness does not prove, that they need not be
explained; nor their completeness, that they need not be
enforced. (2.) The esteeming the writings of the first three
centuries, not equally with, but next to, the Scriptures, never
carried any man yet into dangerous errors, nor probably ever
will. But it has brought many out of dangerous errors, and
particularly out of the errors of Popery. (3.) The neglect,.
in your sense, of the primitive Fathers, that is, the thinking
they were all fools and knaves, has this natural consequence,
(which I grant is no ill one, according to your principles,) to
make all who are not real Christians think Jesus of Nazareth
and his Apostles just as honest and wise as them.
16. You afterwards endeavour to show how the Church of
England came to have such an esteem for the ancient Fathers.
There are several particulars in this account which are liable to
exception. But I let them pass, as they have little connexion
with the point in question.
THE REV. DR, MIDIDLETON. 15
17. You conclude your “Introductory Discourse” thus:
“The design of the present treatise is to fix the religion
of the Protestants on its proper basis, that is, on the sacred
Scriptures.” (Page 111.) Here again you speak in your
personated character; as also when you “freely own the
primitive writers to be of use in attesting and transmitting to
us the genuine books of the holy Scriptures !” (Page 112.)
Books, for the full attestation as well as safe transmission
whereof, you have doubtless the deepest concern
18. I cannot dismiss this Discourse without observing, that
the uncommon artfulness and disingenuity which glare through
the whole, must needs give disgust to every honest and upright
heart; nor is it any credit at all to the cause you have espoused.
Nay, I am persuaded there are many in these kingdoms, who,
though they think as you do concerning the Christian system,
yet could not endure the thought of writing against it in the
manner that you have done; of combating fraud (if it were so)
with fraud, and practising the very thing which they professed
to expose and abhor.
In your “Free Inquiry” itself, you propose,—
“I. To draw out in order all the principal testimonies which
relate to miraculous gifts, as they are found in the writings
of the Fathers, from the earliest ages after the Apostles;
whence we shall see, at one view, the whole evidence by which
they have hitherto been supported.
“II. To throw together all which those Fathers have
delivered, concerning the persons said to have been endued
with those gifts.” (Page 1.)
“III. To illustrate the particular characters and opinions
of the Fathers who attest those miracles.
“IV. To review all the several kinds of miracles which are
pretended to have been wrought, and to observe from the
nature of each how far they may reasonably be suspected.
“W. To refute some of the most plausible objections which
have been hitherto made.” (Page 2.)
I was in hopes you would have given, at least in entering
upon your main work, what you promised so long ago, an
account of “the proper nature and condition of those miraculous
powers which are the subject of the whole dispute, as they are
represented to us in the history of the gospel.” (Preface, p. 10.)
But as you do not appear to have any thought of doing it at
all, you will give me leave at length to do it for you.
16 LETTER TO
The original promise of these runs thus: “These signs shall
follow them that believe: In my name shall they cast out
devils; they shall speak with new tongues; they shall take up
serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt
them; they shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall
recover.” (Mark xvi. 17, 18.)
A further account is given of them by St. Peter, on the very
day whereon that promise was fulfilled: “This is that which
was spoken of by the Prophet Joel, And it shall come to
pass in the last days, saith God, your sons and your daughters
shall prophesy, and your young men shall see visions, and
your old men shall dream dreams.” (Acts ii. 16, 17.)
The account given by St. Paul is a little fuller than this:
“There are diversities of gifts,” (xapiquatov, the usual scrip
tural term for the miraculous gifts of the Holy Ghost,) “but
the same Spirit: For to one is given the word of wisdom; to
another the gifts of healing; to another the working of” other
“miracles; to another prophecy; to another discernment of
spirits; to another divers kinds of tongues; to another the
interpretation of tongues. All these worketh that one and
the same Spirit, dividing to every man severally as he will.”
(1 Cor. xii. 4-11.)
Hence we may observe, that the chief Xapiapata,
spiritual gifts, conferred on the apostolical Church, were,
1. Casting out devils: 2. Speaking with new tongues:
3. Escaping dangers, in which otherwise they must have
perished: 4. Healing the sick: 5. Prophecy, foretelling
things to come: 6. Visions: 7. Divine dreams: And,
8. Discerning of spirits. .
Some of these appear to have been chiefly designed for the
conviction of Jews and Heathens,—as the casting out devils
and speaking with new tongues; some, chiefly for the benefit
of their fellow-Christians,—as healing the sick, foretelling
things to come, and the discernment of spirits; and all, in
order to enable those who either wrought or saw them, to “run
with patience the race set before them,” through all the storms
of persecution which the most inveterate prejudice, rage, and
malice could raise against them.
I. 1. You are, First, “to draw out in order all the principal
testimonies which relate to miraculous gifts, as they are found
in the writings of the Fathers from the earliest ages after the
Apostles.”
THE REV. DR. MIDDLETON 17
You begin with the apostolic Fathers; that is, those who
lived and conversed with the Apostles. “There are several,”
you say, “of this character, whose writings still remain to us:
St. Barnabas, St. Clemens, St. Ignatius, St. Polycarp, St.
Hermas. Now, if those gifts had subsisted after the days of
the Apostles, these must have possessed a large share of them.
But if any of them had, he would have mentioned it in his
writings, which not one of them has done.” (Page 3.)
The argument, fully proposed, runs thus:
If any such gifts had subsisted in them, or in their days,
they must have mentioned them in their circular Epistles to
the Churches; (for so their predecessors, the Apostles, did;)
but they did not mention any such gifts therein.
Sir, your consequence is not of any force; as will easily
appear by a parallel argument:—
If such gifts had subsisted in St. Peter, or in his days, he
must have mentioned them in his circular Epistles to the
Churches. But he does not mention any such gifts therein.
Therefore, they did not subsist in him, or in his days.
Your argument therefore proves too much : Nor can it
conclude against an apostolic Father, without concluding
against the Apostle too.
If therefore the apostolic Fathers had not mentioned any
miraculous gifts in their circular Epistles to the Churches,
you could not have inferred that they possessed none; since
neither does he mention them in his circular Epistles, whom
you allow to have possessed them.
Of all the Apostles, you can produce but one, St. Paul, who
makes mention of these gifts: And that not in his circular Epis
tles to the Churches; for I know not that he wrote any such.
2. All this time I have been arguing on your own suppo
sitions, that these five apostolic Fathers all wrote circular
Epistles to the Churches, and yet never mention these gifts
therein. But neither of these suppositions is true. For, (1.)
Hermas wrote no Epistle at all. (2.) Although the rest wrote
Epistles to particular Churches, (Clemens to the Corinthians,
Ignatius to the Romans, &c.,) yet not one of them wrote any
circular Epistle to the Churches, like those of St. James and
St. Peter; unless we allow that to be a genuine Epistle, which
bears the name of St. Barnabas. (3.) You own they all
“speak of spiritual gifts, as abounding among the Christians
of that age;” but assert, “These cannot mean anything more
18 LETTER. To
than faith, hope, and charity.” (Ibid.) You assert: But
the proof, Sir! I want the proof. Though I am but one of
the vulgar, yet I am not half so credulous as you apprehend
the first Christians to have been. Ipse diri will not satisfy me;
I want plain, clear, logical proof; especially when I consider
how much you build upon this; that it is the main foundation
whereon your hypothesis stands. You yourself must allow,
that in the Epistles of St. Paul, wys, wariza Xapiapata, spiri
tual gifts, does always mean more than faith, hope, and charity;
that it constantly means miraculous gifts. How then do you
prove, that, in the Epistles of St. Ignatius, it means quite
another thing? not miraculous gifts, but only the ordinary
gifts and graces of the gospel? I thought “the reader” was
to “find no evasive distinctions in the following sheets.”
(Preface, p. 31.) Prove then that this distinction is not
evasive; that the same words mean absolutely different things.
Till this is clearly and solidly done, reasonable men must
believe that this and the like expressions mean the same thing
in the writings of the apostolical Fathers as they do in the
writings of the Apostles; namely, not the ordinary graces of
the gospel, but the extraordinary gifts of the Holy Ghost.
3. You aim indeed at a proof, which would be home to the
point, if you were but able to make it out. “These Fathers
themselves seem to disclaim all gifts of a more extraordinary
kind. Thus Polycarp, in his Epistle to the Philippians, says,
“Neither I, nor any other such as I am, can come up to the
wisdom of the blessed Paul.” And in the same Epistle he
declares, ‘It was not granted to him to practise that, Be ye
angry, and sin not.’ St. Ignatius also, in his Epistle to the
Ephesians, says, “These things I prescribe to you, not as if I
were somebody extraordinary. For though I am bound for
his name, I am not yet perfect in Christ Jesus.” (Pages 7, 8.)
I think verily, these extraordinary proofs may stand without
any reply.
4. Yet you courteously add: “If from the passages referred
to above, or any other, it should appear probable to any, that
they were favoured on some occasions with some extraordinary
illuminations, visions, or divine impressions, I shall not dispute
that point; but remind them only, that these gifts were
granted for their particular comfort; and do not therefore, in
any manner, affect or relate to the question now before us.”
(Page 10.)
THE REV. DR, MIDDLETON. 19
I ask pardon, Sir. These do so deeply affect, so nearly
relate to, the question now before us, even as stated by your
self, (Preface, page 28,) that in allowing these you give up the
substance of the question. You yourself have declared, that
one great end of the extraordinary gifts conferred on the
Apostles was, “to enable them to bear up against the shocks
of popular rage and persecution.” Now were not “extra
ordinary illuminations, visions, and impressions,” if given at
all, given for this very end; “for their particular comfort,”
as you now word it? Therefore, in allowing these to the
apostolic Fathers, you allow extraordinary gifts which had
been formerly granted to the Apostles, to have subsisted in
the church after the days of the Apostles, and for the same
end as they did before.
5. Therefore the apostolic writers have not left us in the dark,
with regard to our present argument; and consequently your
triumph comes too soon: “Here then we have an interval of
half a century, in which we have the strongest reason to pre
sume that the extraordinary gifts of the apostolic age were
withdrawn.” (Page 9.) No; not if all the apostolic Fathers
speak of spiritual gifts as abounding among the Christians of
that age; not if “extraordinary illuminations, visions, and
divine impressions still subsisted among them.” For as to your
now putting in, “as exerted openly in the Church for the con
viction of unbelievers,” I must desire you to put it out again;
it comes a great deal too late. The question between you
and me was stated without it, above a hundred pages back.
Although, if it be admitted, it will do you no service; seeing
your proposition is overthrown, if there were “miraculous
gifts after the days of the Apostles,” whether they were
“openly exerted for the conviction of unbelievers” or not.
6. I was a little surprised that you should take your leave
of the apostolic Fathers so soon. But, upon looking forward,
my surprise was at an end: I found you was not guilty of
any design to spare them; but only delayed your remarks
till the reader should be prepared for what might have shocked
him, had it stood in its proper place.
I do not find, indeed, that you make any objection to any
part of the Epistles of Ignatius; no, nor of the Catholic Epistle,
as it is called, which is inscribed with the name of Barnabas.
This clearly convinces me, you have not read it; I am apt to
think, not one page of it; seeing, if you had, you would never
20 LETTER. To
have let slip such an opportunity of exposing one that was
called an apostolic Father.
7. But it would have been strange, if you had not somewhere
brought in the famous phoenix of Clemens Romanus. And yet
you are very merciful upon that head, barely remarking con
cerning it, that “he alleged the ridiculous story of the phoenix,
as atype and proof of the resurrection. Whether all the heathen
writers treat it as nothing else but a mere fable, I know not.”
(Page 55.) But that it is so, is certain; and consequently the
argument drawn from it is weak and inconclusive. Yet it will
not hence follow, either that Clemens was a wicked man, or
that he had none of the extraordinary gifts of the Spirit.
8. There is no real blemish to be found in the whole
character of St. Polycarp. But there is one circumstance left
upon record concerning him which has the appearance of
weakness. And with this you do not fail to acquaint your
reader at a convenient season; namely, “that in the most
ancient dispute concerning the time of holding Easter, St.
Polycarp and Anicetus severally alleged apostolic tradition for
their different practice.” (Page 60.) And it is not improbable,.
that both alleged what was true; that in a point of so little
importance the Apostles varied themselves; some of them
observing it on the fourteenth day of the moon, and others
not. But, be this as it may, it can be no proof, either that
Polycarp was not a holy man, or that he was not favoured
with the extraordinary, as well as ordinary, gifts of the Spirit.
9. With regard to the narrative of his martyrdom, you
affirm, “It is one of the most authentic pieces in all primitive
antiquity.” (Page 124.) I will not vouch for its authenticity;
nor therefore for the story of the dove, the flame forming an
arch, the fragrant smell, or the revelation to Pionius. But
your attempt to account for these things is truly curious. You
say, “An arch of flame round his body is an appearance which
might easily happen, from the common effects of wind. And
the dove said to fly out of him, might be conveyed into the
wood which was prepared to consume him.” (Page 229.) How
much more naturally may we account for both, by supposing
the whole to be a modern fiction, wrote on occasion of that
account mentioned by Eusebius, but lost many ages ago! But
whatever may be thought of this account of his death, neither
does this affect the question, whether during his life he was
endued with the miraculous gifts of the Holy Ghost.
TIIE REV. DR. MIDDLETON. 2]
10. There is one of those whom you style apostolic Fathers
yet behind, of whom you talk full as familiarly as of the rest:
I mean, Hermas: “To whom,” you say, “ some impute the
fraud of forging the Sibylline books.” (Page 37.) It would
not have been amiss, if you had told us, which of the ancients,
whether Christian, Jew, or Heathen, ever accused him of this.
If none ever did, some will be apt to think it is giving a
person but hard measure, to bring an accusation against him
which never was heard of till sixteen hundred years after his
death.
But I can the more easily excuse you, because he is a person
whom you are wholly unacquainted with ; though it is much,
curiosity did not lead you, when you had Archbishop Wake's
translation in your hand, to read over if it were but half a dozen
pages of his famous “Shepherd.” But charity obliges me to
believe you never did. Otherwise, I cannot conceive you
would so peremptorily affirm, of him and the rest together,
“There is not the least claim or pretension, in all their several
pieces, to any of those extraordinary gifts which are the subject
of this inquiry.” (Page 3.) I am amazed | Sir, have you
never a friend in the world? If you was yourself ignorant
of the whole affair, would no one inform you, that all the
three books of Hermas, from the first page to the last, are
nothing else than a recital of his extraordinary gifts, his
visions, prophecies, and revelations?
Can you expect after this, that any man in his senses
should take your word for anything under heaven? that any
one should credit anything which you affirm ? or believe you
any farther than he can see you? Jesus, whom you persecute,
can forgive you this; but how can you forgive yourself?
One would think you should be crying out day and night,
“The Shepherd of Hermas will not let me sleep !”
11. You proceed to the testimony of Justin Martyr, who
wrote about fifty years after the Apostles: He says, (I trans
late his words literally,) “There are prophetic gifts among us
even until now. You may see with us both women and men
having gifts from the Spirit of God.” He particularly insists
on that of “casting out devils, as what every one might see
with his own eyes.” (Page 10.)
Irenaeus, who wrote somewhat later, affirms, “that all who
were truly disciples of Jesus, wrought miracles in his name:
“Some cast out devils; others had visions, or the knowledge
22 LETTER. To
of future events; others healed the sick.’ And as to raising
the dead, he declares it to have been frequently performed on
necessary occasions, by great fasting, and the joint supplica
tion of the Church. “And we hear many,’ says he, “speaking
with all kinds of tongues, and expounding the mysteries of
God.’” (Pages 11, 12.)
“Theophilus, Bishop of Antioch, who lived in the same
age, speaks of casting out devils as then common in the
Church.” (Ibid.)
12. “Tertullian, who flourished toward the end of the
second century, challenges the heathen Magistrates, to ‘call
before their tribunals any person possessed with a devil. And
if the evil spirit, when commanded by any Christian, did not
confess himself to be a devil, who elsewhere called himself a
god, they should take the life of that Christian.’” (Ibid.)
“Minutius Felix, supposed to have wrote in the beginning
of the third century, addressing himself to his heathen friend,
says, “The greatest part of you know what confessions the
demons make concerning themselves when we expel them
out of the bodies of men.’” (Page 13.)
13. “Origen, something younger than Minutius, declares,
that there remained still the manifest indications of the Holy
Spirit. ‘For the Christians,’ says he, ‘cast out devils,
perform many cures, foretell things to come. And many
have been converted to Christianity by visions. I have seen
many examples of this sort.’” (Page 14.)
In another place he says, “Signs of the Holy Ghost were
shown at the beginning of the teaching of Jesus;” (not, as you
translate it, “Miracles began with the preaching of Jesus;”
that is quite a different thing;) “more were shown after his
ascension, but afterwards fewer. However, even now there are
still some remains of them with a few, whose souls are cleansed
by the word, and a life conformable to it.” (Page 15.) Again :
“Some,” says he, “heal the sick. I myself have seen many
so healed, of loss of senses, madness, and innumerable other
evils which neither men nor devils can cure.” (Ibid.) “And
this is done, not by magical arts, but by prayer, and certain
plain adjurations, such as any common Christian may use;
for generally common men do things of this kind.” (Page 16.)
14. “Cyprian, who wrote about the middle of the third
century, says, “Beside the visions of the night, even in the
day-time, innocent children among us are filled with the Holy
THE REV, DR, MIDDLETON, 23
Spirit; and in ecstasies see, and hear, and speak those things
by which God is pleased to admonish and instruct us.’” (Ibid.)
Elsewhere he particularly mentions the casting out of devils:
“Which,” says he, “either depart immediately, or by degrees,
according to the faith of the patient, or the grace of him that
works the cure.” (Page 17.)
“Arnobius, who is supposed to have wrote in the year of
Christ 303, tells us, ‘Christ appears even now to men unpol
luted, and eminently holy, who love him;—whose very name
puts evil spirits to flight, strikes their prophets dumb, deprives
the soothsayers of the power of answering, and frustrates the
acts of arrogant magicians.’” (Page 18.)
“Lactantius, who wrote about the same time, speaking of
evil spirits, says, “Being adjured by Christians, they retire out
of the bodies of men, confess themselves to be demons, and
tell their names, even the same which are adored in the
temples.’” (Ibid.)
15. “These,” you say, “are the principal testimonies which
assert miraculous gifts through the three first centuries; which
might be supported by many more of the same kind, from the
same as well as different writers. But none will scruple to risk
the fate of the cause upon these.” (Page 19.) Thus far I do
not scruple it. I do not doubt but the testimonies of these
nine witnesses, added to the evidence of the apostolic Fathers,
will satisfy every impartial man with regard to the point in
question. Yet I see no cause, if there are nine witnesses more,
to give up their evidence; seeing you may possibly raise
objections against these which the others are unconcerned in.
If then you should invalidate what I have to reply in
oehalf of the witnesses now produced, you will have done but
half your work. I shall afterwards require a fair hearing for
the others also.
16. You close this head with remarking, (1) “That the
silence of all the apostolic writers on the subject of these gifts,
must dispose us to conclude they were then withdrawn.” (Ibid.)
O Sir, mention this no more. I intreat you, never name their
silence again. They speak loud enough to shame you as long
as you live. You cannot therefore talk with any grace of
“the pretended revival of them, after a cessation of forty or
fifty years;” or draw conclusions from that which never was.
Your second remark is perfectly new : I dare say, none
ever observed before yourself, that this particular circumstance
24 LETTER, TO
of the primitive Christians “carried with it an air of impos
ture,” namely, their “challenging all the world to come and
see the miracles which they wrought !” (Page 21.) To
complete the argument, you should have added, And their
staking their lives upon the performance of them.
17. I doubt you have not gone one step forward yet. You
have indeed advanced many bold assertions; but you have
not fairly proved one single conclusion with regard to the
point in hand.
But a natural effect of your lively imagination is, that from
this time you argue more and more weakly; inasmuch as,
the farther you go, the more things you imagine (and only
imagine) yourself to have proved. Consequently, as you
gather up more mistakes every step you take, every page is
more precarious than the former.
II. 1. The Second thing you proposed was, “to throw
together all which those Fathers have delivered concerning
the persons said to have been endued with the extraordinary
gifts of the Spirit.” (Ibid.)
“Now, whenever we think or speak with reverence,” say
you, “of those primitive times, it is always with regard to
these very Fathers whose testimonies I have been collecting.
And they were indeed the chief persons and champions of the
Christian cause, the Pastors, Bishops, and Martyrs of the
primitive Church; namely, Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, Theo
philus, Tertullian, Minutius Felix, Origen, Cyprian, Arnobius,
Lactantius.” Sir, you stumble at the threshold. A common
dictionary may inform you that these were not all either
Pastors, Bishops, or Martyrs.
2. You go on as you set out: “Yet none of these have any
where affirmed, that they themselves were endued with any
power of working miracles.” (Page 22.) You should say,
With any of those extraordinary gifts promised by our Lord,
and conferred on his Apostles.
No! Have “none of these anywhere affirmed, that they
themselves were endued” with any extraordinary.gifts?
What think you of the very first of them, Justin Martyr
Either you are quite mistaken in the account you give of him
elsewhere, (pages 27, 30,) or he affirmed this of himself over
and over. And as to Cyprian, you will by and by spend
several pages together (page 101, &c.) on the extraordinary
gifts he affirmed himself to be endued with.
ThE REV. DR. MIDDLETON, 25
But suppose they had not anywhere affirmed this of them
selves, what would you infer therefrom ? that they were not
endued with any extraordinary gifts? Then, by the very same
method of arguing, you might prove that neither St. Peter, nor
James, nor John, were endued with any such. For neither
do they anywhere affirm this of themselves in any of the
writings which they have left behind them.
3. Your argument concerning the apostolic Fathers is just
as conclusive as this. For if you say, “The writers following
the apostolic Fathers do not affirm them to have had any
miraculous gifts; therefore they had none;” by a parity of
reason you must say, “The writers following the Apostles do
not affirm them to have had any miraculous gifts; therefore
the Apostles had none.”
4. Your next argument against the existence of those gifts
is, “that the Fathers do not tell us the names of them which
had them.” This is not altogether true. The names of
Justin Martyr and Cyprian are pretty well known; as is,
among the learned, that of Dionysius, Bishop of Alexandria.
(Pages 106, 212.) But what, if they did not? Supposing
miraculous powers were openly exerted in the Church, and
that not only they themselves, but every oine else, might see
this whenever they pleased; if any Heathen might come and
see whenever he pleased, what could a reasonable man desire
more? What did it signify to him to know the names of
those whom he heard prophesying, or saw working miracles?
Though, without doubt, whoever saw the miracles wrought,
might easily learn the names of those that wrought them :
which, nevertheless, the Christians had no need to publish
abroad, to expose them so much the more to the rage and
malice of their persecutors.
6. Your third argument is, “The Christian workers of mira
cles were always charged with imposture by their adversaries.
Lucian tells us, “Whenever any crafty juggler went to the
Christians, he grew rich immediately.’ And Celsus represents
the Christian wonder-workers as mere vagabonds and common
cheats, who ranmbled about to fairs and markets.” (Page 23.)
And is it any wonder, that either a Jew or a Heathen should
represent them thus? Sir, I do not blame you for not believing
the Christian system, but for betraying so gross a partiality;
for gleaning up every scrap of heathen scandal, and palming it
upon us as unquestionable evidence; and for not translating
26 LETTER TO
even these miserable fragments with any accuracy or faithful
ness. Instead of giving us the text, bad as it is, you commonly
substitute a paraphrase yet worse. And this the unlearned
reader naturally supposes to be a faithful translation. It is
no credit to your cause, if it needs such supports. And this
is no credit to you, if it does not.
To that of Lucian and Celsus, you add the evidence
of Caecilius too, who calls, say you, these workers of miracles,
“a lurking nation, shunning the light.” Then they were
strangely altered all on a sudden; for you told us that, just
before, they were proving themselves cheats by a widely
different method,—by “calling out both upon Magistrates
and people, and challenging all the world to come and see
what they did l’’ (Page 20.)
I was not aware that you had begun “to throw together all
which the Fathers have delivered, concerning the persons said
to have been endued with those extraordinary gifts.” And it
seems you have made an end of it! And accordingly you
proceed to sum up the evidence; to “observe, upon the whole,
from these characters of the primitive wonder-workers, as given
both by friends and enemies, we may fairly conclude that the
gifts of those ages were generally engrossed by private Chris
tians, who travelled about from city to city to assist the ordinary
preachers, in the conversion of Pagans, by the extraordinary
miracles they pretended to perform.” (Page 24.)
Characters given both by friends and enemies / Pray, Sir,
what friends have you cited for this character? or what ene
mies, except only Celsus the Jew? (And you are a miserable
interpreter for him.) So, from the single testimony of such a
witness, you lay it down as an oracular truth, that all the
miracle-workers of the first three ages were “mere vagabonds
and common cheats,” rambling about from city to city, to
assist in converting Heathens, by tricks and imposture! And
this you ingeniously call, “throwing together all which the
Fathers have delivered concerning them !”
9. But, to complete all, “Here again,” you say, “we see a
dispensation of things ascribed to God, quite different from
that which we meet with in the New Testament.” (Page 24.)
We see a dispensation / Where? Not in the primitive
Church; not in the writings of one single Christian; not of
one Heathen; and only of one Jew; for poor Celsus had not
a second; though he multiplies, under your forming hand, into
ThE REV. D.R. MIDDLETON. 27
a cloud of witnesses. He alone ascribes this to the ancient
Christians, which you in their name ascribe to God. With the
same regard to truth you go on: “In those days the power of
working miracles” (you should say, the extraordinary gifts)
“was committed to none but those who presided in the Church
of Christ.” Ipse dixit for that. But I cannot take your word;
especially when the Apostles and Evangelists say otherwise.
“But, upon the pretended revival of those powers,”—Sir, we
do not pretend the revival of them; seeing we shall believe
they never were intermitted, till you can prove the contrary, -
“we find the administration of them committed, not to those
who had the government of the Church, not to the Bishops,
the Martyrs, or the principal champions of the Christian
cause, but to boys, to women, and, above all, to private and
obscure laymen; not only of an inferior, but sometimes also
of a bad, character.”
Surely, Sir, you talk in your sleep: You could never talk
thus, if you had your eyes open, and your understanding about
you. “We find the administration of them committed, not to
those who had the government of the Church.” No! I
thought Cyprian had had the government of the Church at
Carthage, and Dionysius at Alexandria! “Not to the
Bishops.” Who were these then that were mentioned last?
Bishops, or no Bishops? “Not to the Martyrs.” Well, if
Cyprian was neither Bishop nor Martyr, I hope you will allow
Justin’s claim. “Not to the principal champions of the
Christian cause.” And yet you told us, not three pages since,
that “these very Fathers were the chief champions of the
Christian cause in those days!”—“But to boys, and to
women.” I answer: “This is that which was spoken of by the
Prophet Joel, It shall come to pass, that I will pour out my
Spirit, saith the Lord, and your sons and your daughters shall
prophesy l’—a circumstance which turns this argument full
against you, till you openly avow you do not believe those
prophecies. “And, above all, to private and obscure laymen,
not only of an inferior, but sometimes of a bad, character.”
I answer, (1.) You cite only one Ante-Nicene writer, to prove
them committed to “private and obscure laymen.” And he
says this and no more: “Generally private men do things of
this kind.”* By what rule of grammar you construe Biara,
private and obscure laymen, I know not. (2.) To prove these
* 0s erinay 18wra ro rous row wearlson.—Origen. Cont. Cels. l. vii.
28 LETTER. To
were sometimes men of a bad character, you quote also but
one Ante-Nicene Father; (for I presume you will not assert
the genuineness of the, so called, “Apostolical Constitu
tions;”) and that one is, in effect, none at all: It is Tertullian,
who, in his “Prescription against Heretics,” says, “They will
add many things of the authority” (or power) “ of every
heretical teacher; that they raised the dead, healed the sick,
foretold things to come.”* They will add / But did Ter
tullian believe them? There is no shadow of reason to think
he did. And if not, what is all this to the purpose? No
more than the tales of later ages which you add, concerning
the miracles wrought by bones and relics.
10. “These things,” you add, “are so strange, as to give
just reason to suspect that there was some original fraud in
the case, and that those strolling wonder-workers, by a dexterity
of juggling, imposed upon the pious Fathers, whose strong
prejudices, and ardent zeal for the interest of Christianity,
would dispose them to embrace, without examination, what
ever seemed to promote so good a cause.” (Page 25.) You
now speak tolerably plain, and would be much disappointed
if those who have no “strong prejudices for Christianity” did
not apply what you say of these “strolling wonder-workers”
to the Apostles, as well as their successors.
11. A very short answer will suffice: “These things are so
strange.” They are more strange than true. You have not
proved one jot or tittle of them yet. Therefore, the conse
quences you draw must fall to the ground till you find them
some better support.
12. Nay, but “it is certain and notorious,” you say, “that
this was really the case in some instances;” that is, that
“strolling, juggling wonder-workers imposed upon the pious
Fathers.” (Page 26.) Sir, I must come in again with my
cuckoo's note,—The proof! Where is the proof! Till this is
produced I cannot allow that “this is certain and notorious,”
even in one individual instance.
13. Let us now stand still, and observe what it is you have
made out, under this Second head. What you proposed
was, “to throw together all which the primitive Fathers had
delivered concerning the persons said to be then endued
with the extraordinary gifts of the Spirit.” And how have
* Adjicient multa de autoritate cujusque doctoris hasretici, illos mortuos susci
‘asse, debiles reformasse, &c.
THE REV. DR. MIDDLETON. 29
you executed what you proposed? You have thrown together
a quotation from a Jew, two from Heathens, three quarters of
a line from Origen, and three lines from Tertullian | Nothing
at all, it is true, to the point in question. But that you could
not help.
14. And this, it seems, is “all you have been able to draw
from any of the primitive writers, concerning the persons
who were endued with the extraordinary gifts of the Holy
Ghost!” (Page 21.)
Permit me, Sir, to apply to you what was spoken on another
occasion: “Sir, the well is deep, and thou hast nothing to
draw with ; ” neither sufficient skill, nor industry and appli
cation. Besides, you are resolved to draw out of the well
what was never in it, and must, of course, lose all your labour.
III. 1. You are, “Thirdly, to show the particular characters
and opinions of those Fathers who attest these gifts.”
Suffer me to remind you that you mentioned nine of these,
Justin, Irenaeus, Theophilus, Tertullian, Minutius Felix,
Origen, Cyprian, Arnobius, and Lactantius. You are there
fore now to show what were “the particular characters and
opinions of these Fathers.”
Indeed, I should think their opinions had small relation to
the question. But, since you think otherwise, I am prepared
to hear you.
You premise, “that an unexceptionable witness must have ’’
(page 26) both judgment and honesty; and then, passing
over the apostolic Fathers, as supposing them on your side,
endeavour to show that these other Fathers had neither.
2. You begin with Justin Martyr, who, you say, “frequently
affirms, that the miraculous gift of expounding the Holy
Scriptures, or the mysteries of God, was granted to himself, by
the special grace of God.” (Page 27.) Upon which I observe,
(1.) It has not yet been agreed among learned men, that
declaring “the mysteries of God” is the same thing with
“expounding the Holy Scriptures.” (2.) It is not clear that
Justin does affirm his being endued either with one or the
other; at least, not from the passages which you cite. The first,
literally translated, runs thus: “He hath revealed to us what
soever things we have understood by his grace from the Scrip
tures also.” * The other: “I have not any such power; but
* Arekawyev sv muw wavla oaa kal aro row opaqwy Bia rms xapdos avra
wevonkauev.-Dial. par. 2.
30 LETTER. To
God has given me the grace to understand his Scriptures.”
Now, Sir, by which of these does it appear that Justin affirms
he had the miraculous gift of expounding the Scriptures?
3. However, you will affirm it, were it only to have the
pleasure of confuting it. In order to which, you recite three
passages from his writings, wherein he interprets Scripture
weakly enough; and then add, after a strained compliment to
Dr. Grabe, and a mangled translation of one of his remarks:
“His Works are but little else than a wretched collection of
interpretations of the same kind. Yet this pious Father insists
that they were all suggested to him from heaven.” (Page 30.)
No; neither the one nor the other. Neither dointerpretations
of Scripture (good or bad) make the tenth part of his writings;
nor does he insist that all those which are found therein were
suggested to him from heaven. This does not follow from any
passage you have cited yet; nor from his saying, in a particular
case, “Do you think I could have understood these things in
the Scriptures, if I had not, by the will of God, received the
grace to understand them?”
4. However, now you clap your wings. “What credit,”
say you, “can be due to this Father, in the report of other
people's gifts, who was so grossly deceived, or willing, at least,
to deceive others, in this confident attestation of his own?”
(Ibid.) The answer is plain and obvious. It is not clear
that he attests his own at all. Consequently, as yet his credit
is unblemished.
“But he did not understand Hebrew, and gave a wrong
derivation of the Hebrew word, Satan.” Allowing this, that
he was no good etymologist, his credit as a witness may be
as good as ever.
5. But, to blast his credit for ever, you will now reckon up
all the heresies which he held. And, First: “He believed the
doctrine of the Millennium; or, ‘that all the saints should be
raised in the flesh, and reign with Christ, in the enjoyment of
all sensual pleasures, for a thousand years before the general
resurrection.’” (Page 31.) These you mark as though they
were Justin’s words. I take knowledge you hold, no faith is
to be kept with heretics; and that all means are fair which
conduce to so good an end as driving the Christian heresy
out of the world.
* Ovöe yap 5uvalus suol rotavlm ris estv, a NAa xapus rapa €es eó06m uoi eis re
avvieval ras Ypapas avra.—Dial. par. 2.
Th E REV. D.R. MIDDLETON. 31
It is by this principle only that I can account for your
adding: “Which doctrine” (that of their enjoying all sensual
pleasures) “he deduces from the testimony of the Prophets,
and of St. John the Apostle; and was followed in it by the
Fathers of the second and third centuries.”
The doctrine (as you very well know) which Justin deduced
from the Prophets and the Apostles, and in which he was
undoubtedly followed by the Fathers of the second and third
centuries, is this:
The souls of them who have been martyred for the witness
of Jesus, and for the word of God, and who have not
worshipped the beast, neither received his mark, shall live
and reign with Christ a thousand years.
But the rest of the dead shall not live again, until the
thousand years are finished.
Now, to say they believed this, is neither more nor less
than to say, they believed the Bible.
6. The second heresy you charge him with is the believing,
“that those ‘sons of God’ mentioned Gen. vi. 4, of whom it
is there said, ‘They came in unto the daughters of men, and
they bare children to them,’ were evil angels.” (Page 32.)
And I allow, he too lightly received this on the testimony
of the Jewish Commentators. But this only proves that he
was a fallible man; not that he was a knave, or that he had
not eyes and ears.
7. You charge him, Thirdly, “with treating the spurious
books, published under the names of the Sibyl and Hystaspes,
with the same reverence as the prophetic Scriptures.” (Page
33.) His words are: “By the power of evil spirits, it was
made death to read the books of Hystaspes, or of the Sibyl,
or of the Prophets.” Well; how does this prove that he
treated those books with the same reverence as the prophetic
Scriptures?
“But it is certain,” you say, “that, from this example and
authority of Justin, they were held in the highest veneration
by the Fathers and Rulers of the Church, through all
succeeding ages.” (Ibid.)
I do not conceive it is certain. I wait your proof, first,
of the fact; next, of the reason you assign for it. The fact
itself, that “these books were held in the highest veneration
by the Fathers and Rulers through all succeeding ages,” is
in nowise proved by that single quotation from Clemens Alex
32 LETTER. To
andrinus, wherein he urges the Heathens with the testimonies
of their own authors, of the Sibyl, and of Hystaspes. (Page 34.)
We cannot infer from hence that he himself held them “in
the highest veneration; ” much less that all the Fathers did.
And as to the reason you assign for that veneration,—the
example and authority of Justin,—you cite no writer of any
kind, good or bad. So he that will believe it, may.
But some, you tell us, “impute the forging these books to
Justin.” Be pleased to tell us, likewise, who those are; and
what grounds they allege for that imputation. Till them, it
can be of no signification.
8. You charge him, Fourthly, “with believing that silly
story concerning the Septuagint version of the Old Testa
ment; with saying, that he himself, when at Alexandria, saw
the remains of the cells in which the translators were shut
up; and with making a considerable mistake in the chronology
relating thereto.” (Page 37.) And if all this be allowed, and,
over and above, that he “frequently cites apocryphal books,
and cites the Scriptures by memory;” what have you gained
toward the proof of your grand conclusion, that “he was
either too great a fool, or too great a knave, to be believed
touching a plain matter of fact?”
9. You seem sensible of this, and therefore add, Fifthly:
“It will be said, perhaps, that these instances show a weak
ness of judgment, but do not touch the credit of Justin as a
witness of fact.” (Page 29.) But can you scrape up nothing
from all the dunghills of antiquity that does? I dare say,
you will do your utmost. And, first, you reply, “The want
of judgment alone may, in some cases, disqualify a man from
being a good witness. Thus, Justin himself was imposed
upon by those of Alexandria, who showed him some old ruins
under the name of cells. And so he was by those who told
him, there was a statue at Rome, inscribed, Simoni Deo
Sancto; whereas it was really inscribed, Semoni Sanco Deo;
to an old deity of the Sabines. Now,” say you, “if he was
deceived in such obvious facts, how much more easily would
he be deceived by subtle and crafty impostors!” (Pages 40,
41.) Far less easily. A man of good judgment may be
deceived in the inscriptions of statues, and points of ancient
history. But, if he has only eyes and ears, and a small degree
of common sense, he cannot be deceived in facts where he is
both an eye and ear witness.
THE REV. DR. MIDDLETON. 33
10. For a parting blow, you endeavour to prove, Sixthly,
that Justin was a knave, as well as a fool. To this end you
remark, that “he charges the Jews with erasing three
passages out of the Greek Bible; one whereof stands there
still, and the other two were not expunged by some Jew, but
added by some Christian. Nay, that able critic and Divine,
John Croius,” (you know when to bestow honourable appel
lations,) “says Justin forged and published this passage for
the confirmation of the Christian doctrine, as well as the
greatest part of the Sibylline oracles, and the sentences of
Mercurius.” (Page 42.)
With far greater probability than John Croius asserts that
Justin forged these passages, a man of candour would hope
that he read them in his copy (though incorrect) of the Greek
Bible. And till you disprove this, or prove the assertion of
Croius, you are got not a jot farther still. But, notwith
standing you have taken true pains to blacken him, both
with regard to his morals and understanding, he may still be
an honest man, and an unexceptionable witness, as to plain
facts done before his face.
11. You fall upon Irenaeus next, and carefully enumerate
all the mistakes in his writings. As, First, that he held the
doctrine of the millennium, and related a weak fancy of
Tapias concerning it. Secondly: That he believed our
Saviour to have lived fifty years. Thirdly: That he believed
Enoch and Elias were translated, and St. Paul caught up to
that very paradise from which Adam was expelled. (So he
might, and all the later Fathers with him, without being either
the better or the worse.) Fourthly: That he believed the
story concerning the Septuagint Version; nay, and that the
Scriptures were destroyed in the Babylonish captivity, but
restored again after seventy years by Esdras, inspired for that
purpose. “In this also ’’ (you say, but do not prove) “he
was followed by all the principal Fathers that succeeded him;
although there is no better foundation for it, than that
fabulous relation in the Second Book of Esdras.” You add,
Fifthly, that “he believed the sons of God who came in to
the daughters of men were evil angels.” And all the early
Fathers, you are very ready to believe, “were drawn into the
same error, by the authority of the apocryphal Book of
Enoch, cited by St. Jude.” (Page 44.)
12. It is not only out of your good-will to St. Jude, or
34 r/ETTER. To
Irenaeus, you gather up these fragments of error, that nothing
be lost, but also to the whole body of the ancient Christians.
For “all those absurdities,” you say, “were taught by the
Fathers of those ages,” (naturally implying, by all the
Fathers,) “as doctrines of the universal Church, derived
immediately from the Apostles; and thought so necessary,
that those who held the contrary were hardly considered as
real Christians.” Here I must beg you to prove as well as
assert, (1.) That all these absurdities of the millennium in the
grossest sense of it, of the age of Christ, of paradise, of the
destruction of the Scriptures, of the Septuagint Version, and
of evil angels mixing with women, were taught by all the
Fathers of those ages: (2.) That all those Fathers taught
these as doctrines of the universal Church, derived immedi
ately from the Apostles: And, (3.) That they all denied those
to be real Christians who held the contrary.
13. You next cite two far-fetched interpretations of Scrip
ture, and a weak saying out of the writings of Irenaeus. But
all three prove no more, than that in these instances he did
not speak with strictness of judgment; not, that he was
incapable of knowing what he saw with his own eyes, or of
truly relating it to others.
Before we proceed to what with equal good humour and
impartiality you remark concerning the rest of these Fathers,
it will be proper to consider what more is interspersed
concerning these in the sequel of this argument.
14. And, First, you say, “Justin used an inconclusive
argument for the existence of the souls of men after death.”
(Page 67.) It is possible he might; but whether it was
conclusive or no, this does not affect his moral character.
You say, Secondly, “It was the common opinion of all the
Fathers, taken from the authority of Justin Martyr, that the
demons wanted the fumes of the sacrifices to strengthen them
for the enjoyment of their lustful pleasures.” (Page 69.)
Sir, no man of reason will believe this, concerning one of
the Fathers, upon your bare assertion. I must therefore
desire you to prove by more than a scrap of a sentence,
(1.) That Justin himself held this opinion: (2.) That he
invented it: (3.) That it was the common opinion of all the
Fathers: And, (4.) That they all took it on his authority.
15. You affirm, Thirdly: “He says, that all devils yield
and submit to the name of Jesus; as also to the name of the
ThE REV, DR. MIDDLETON. 35
God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.” (Page 85.) Very likely
he may.
Lastly. You cite a passage from him, concerning the Spirit
of God influencing the minds of holy men. But neither does
this in any measure affect his credit as a witness of fact.
Consequently, after all that you have been able to draw,
either from himself, or any of the primitive writers, here is
one witness of unquestionable credit, touching the miracles
wrought in the primitive Church, touching the subsistence of
the extraordinary gifts after the days of the Apostles.
16. But let us come once more to Irenaeus; for you have
not done with him yet: “Forgery,” you say, “has been
actually charged upon Justin,” (by John Croius and Dr.
Middleton,) “and may with equal reason be charged on
Irenaeus. For what other account can be given of his
frequent appeals to apostolical tradition, for the support of so
many incredible doctrines?” (Page 111.) Why, this very
natural one, that in non-essential points he too easily followed
the authority of Papias, a weak man, who on slight grounds
believed many trifling things to have been said or done by
the Apostles. And allowing all this, yet it does not give us
so “lamentable an idea of those primitive ages and primitive
champions of the Christian cause.” (Page 59.)
The same account may be given of his mistake concerning
the age of our Lord. (Ibid.) There is therefore, as yet,
neither reason nor any plausible pretence for laying forgery
to his charge. And consequently, thus far his credit as a
witness stands clear and unimpeached.
But you say, Secondly, “He was a zealous asserter of tradi
tion.” (Page 61.) He might be so, and yet be an honest man;
and that, whether he was mistaken or no, in supposing Papias
to have been a disciple of John the Apostle. (Page 64.)
You say, Thirdly, He supposed “that the disciples of Simon
Magus, as well as Carpocrates, used magical arts;” (page 68;)
that “the dead were frequently raised in his time;” (page
72;) that “the Jews, by the name of God, cast out devils;”
(page 85;) and that “many had even then the gift of tongues,
although he had it not himself.” This is the whole of your
charge against St. Irenaeus, when summed up and laid toge
ther. And now, let any reasonable person judge, whether all
this gives us the least cause to question, either his having
sense enough to discern a plain matter of fact, or honesty
36 LETTER. To
enough to relate it. Here then is one more credible witness
of miraculous gifts after the days of the Apostles.
18. What you advance concerning the history of tradition,
I am neither concerned to defend nor to confute. Only I
must observe, you forget yourself again, where you say, “The
fable of the millennium, of the old age of Christ, with many
more, were all embraced by the earliest Fathers.” (Page 64.)
For modesty’s sake, Sir, think a little before you speak; and
remember you yourself informed us, that one of these was
never embraced at all, but by one single Father only.
19. “I cannot,” you say, “dismiss this article, without
taking notice, that witchcraft was universally believed through
all ages of the primitive Church.” (Page 66.) This you
show by citations from several of the Fathers; who likewise
believed, as you inform us, that “evil spirits had power
frequently to afflict either the bodies or minds of men;” that
they “acted the parts of the heathen gods, and assumed the
forms of those who were called from the dead. Now, this
opinion,” say you, “is not only a proof of the grossest
credulity, but of that species of it which, of all others, lays a
man most open to imposture.” (Page 70.)
And yet this opinion, as you know full well, has its founda
tion, not only in the histories of all ages, and all nations through
out the habitable world, even where Christianity never obtained;
but particularly in Scripture; in abundance of passages both of
the Old and New Testament; as where the Israelites were
expressly commanded not to “suffer a witch to live;” (ibid.:)
where St. Paul numbers “witchcraft” with “the works of the
flesh,” (Gal. v. 19,20) and ranks it with adultery and idolatry;
and where St. John declares, “Without are sorcerers, and
whoremongers, and murderers.” (Rev. xxii. 15.)
That the gods of the Heathens are devils, (1 Cor. x. 20) is
declared in terms, by one of those who are styled inspired
writers. And many conceive, that another of them gives us
a plain instance of their “assuming the form of those who
were called from the dead.” (1 Sam. xxviii. 13, 14.)
Of the power of evil spirits to afflict the minds of men,
none can doubt, who believe there are any such beings. And
of their power to afflict the body, we have abundant proof,
both in the history of Job, and that of the gospel demoniacs.
I do not mean, Sir, to accuse you of believing these things.
You have shown that you are guiltless in this matter; and that
Th E REV. D.R. MIDDLETON. 37
you pay no more regard to that antiquated book, the Bible,
than you do to the Second Book of Esdras. But, alas ! the
Fathers were not so far enlightened. And because they were
bigoted to that old book, they of consequence held for truth
what, you assure us, was mere delusion and imposture.
20. Now to apply: “A mind,” you say, “so totally possessed
by superstitious fancies, could not even suspect the pretensions
of those vagrant jugglers, who in those primitive ages were so
numerous, and so industriously employed in deluding their
fellow-creatures. Both Heathens, Jews, and Christians are all
allowed to have had such impostors among them.” (Page 71.)
By whom, Sir, is this allowed of the Christians? By whom,
but Celsus, was it affirmed of them? Who informed you of
their growing so numerous, and using such industry in their
employment? To speak the plain truth, your mind appears
to be “so totally possessed by ” these “vagrant jugglers,” that
you cannot say one word about the primitive Church, but they
immediately start up before you; though there is no more proof
of their ever existing, than of a witch’s sailing in an egg-shell.
21. You conclude this head: “When pious Christians are
arrived to this pitch of credulity, as to believe that evil spirits
or evil men can work miracles, in opposition to the gospel;
their very piety will oblige them to admit as miraculous what- .
ever is pretended to be wrought in defence of it.” (Ibid.)
Once more you have spoken out; you have shown, without
disguise, what you think of St. Paul, and the “lying miracles”
(2 Thess. ii. 9) which he (poor man!) believed evil spirits or
evil men could work in opposition to the gospel; and of St.
John, talking so idly of him who “doeth great wonders, and
deceiveth them that dwell on the earth” (even though they
were not Christians) “by means of those miracles which he
hath power to do.” (Rev. xiii. 13, 14.)
22. You have now finished the third thing you proposed;
which was, “to show the particular characters of the several
Fathers, who attest” that they were eye and ear witnesses of
the extraordinary gifts in the primitive Church.
You named nine of these : Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, Theo
philus, Tertullian, Minutius Felix, Origen, Cyprian, Arnobius,
and Lactantius; at the same time observing, that many other
writers attest the same thing.
But let the others stand by. Are these good men and
true? That is the present question.
38 LETTER, TO
You say, “No; ” and to prove that these nine are knaves,
bring several charges against two of them.
These have been answered at large: Some of them proved to
be false; some, though true, yet not invalidating their evidence.
But supposing we wave the evidence of these two, here are
seven more still to come.
O, but you say, “If there were twice seven, they only repeat
the words which these have taught them.”
You say; but how often must you be reminded, that saying
and proving are two things? I grant, in three or four opinions,
some (though not all) of these were mistaken, as well as those
two. But this by no means proves that they were all knaves
together; or that if Justin Martyr or Irenaeus speaks wrong,
I am therefore to give no credit to the evidence of Theophilus
or Minutius Felix.
23. You have therefore made a more lame piece of work
on this head, if possible, than on the preceding. You have
promised great things, and performed just nothing. You have
left above three parts in four of your work entirely untouched;
as these two are not a fourth part even of the writers you
have named, as attesting the continuance of the “extraordinary
gifts” after the age of the Apostles.
But you have taught that trick at least to your “vagrant
jugglers,” to supply the defect of all other arguments. At every
dead lift you are sure to play upon us these dear creatures of
your own imagination. They are the very strength of your
battle, your tenth legion. Yet if a man impertinently calls
for proof of their existence, if he comes close and engages
them hand to hand, they immediately vanish away.
IV. You are, in the Fourth place, to “review all the several
kinds of miraculous gifts which are pretended to have been
given; and to observe, from the nature of each, how far they
may reasonably be suspected.” (Page 72.)
“These,” you say, “are, 1. The power of raising the dead.
2. Of healing the sick. 3. Of casting out devils. 4. Of
prophesying. 5. Of seeing visions. 6. Of discovering the
secrets of men. 7. Of expounding the Scriptures. 8. Of
speaking with tongues.”
I had rather have had an account of the miraculous powers
as they are represented to us in the history of the gospel.
But that account you are not inclined to give. So we will
make the best of what we have.
THE REV. DR. MIDDLETON, 39
Section I. 1. And, First, as to “raising the dead.” Irenaeus
affirms: “This was frequently performed on necessary occa
sions; when by great fastings and the joint supplication of the
Church, the spirit of the dead person returned into him, and
the man was given back to the prayers of the saints.” (Ibid.)
2. But you object: “There is not an instance of this to be
found in the three first centuries.” (Ibid.) I presume you
mean, no heathen historian has mentioned it; for Christian
historians were not. I answer, (1.) It is not probable a
heathen historian would have related such a fact, had he
known it. (2.) It is equally improbable, he should know it;
seeing the Christians knew with whom they had to do; and
that, had such an instance been made public, they would
not long have enjoyed him who had been given back to
their prayers. They could not but remember what had been
before, when the Jews sought Lazarus also to kill him; a very
obvious reason why a miracle of this particular kind ought not
to have been published abroad; especially considering, Thirdly,
that it was not designed for the conversion of the Heathens;
but “on occasions necessary” for the good of the Church, of
the Christian community. Lastly: It was a miracle proper,
above all others, to support and confirm the Christians, who
were daily tortured and slain, but sustained by the hope of
obtaining a better resurrection.
3. You object, Secondly: “The Heathens constantly
affirmed the thing itself to be impossible.” (Page 73.) They
did so. But is it “a thing incredible with you, that God
should raise the dead?”
4. You object, Thirdly, that when “Autolycus, an eminent
Heathen, scarce forty years after this, said to Theophilus,
Bishop of Antioch, “Show me but one raised from the dead,
that I may see and believe;’ (ibid.;) Theophilus could not.”
Supposing he could not, I do not see that this contradicts
the testimony of Irenaeus; for he does not affirm, (though you
say he does) that this was “performed, as it were, in every
parish, or place where there was a Christian Church.” (Page
72.) He does not affirm, that it was performed at Antioch;
probably, not in any Church, unless where a concurrence of
important circumstances required it. Much less does he
affirm, that the persons raised in France would be alive forty
years after. Therefore, although it be granted, (1.) That the
historians of that age are silent; (2.) That the Heathens said,
40 LETTER TO
the thing was impossible; and, (3.) That Theophilus did not
answer the challenge of the Heathen, Autolycus;-all this will
not invalidate, in any degree, the express testimony of
Irenaeus, or prove that none have been raised from the dead
since the days of the Apostles.
Section II. 1. “The next gift is, that of healing the sick;
often performed by anointing them with oil; in favour of
which,” as you observe, “the ancient testimonies are more
full and express.” (Page 75.) But “this,” you say, “might
be accounted for without a miracle, by the natural efficacy of
the oil itself.” (Page 76.) I doubt not. Be pleased to try
how many you can cure thus, that are blind, deaf, dumb, or
paralytic; and experience, if not philosophy, will teach you,
that oil has no such natural efficacy as this.
2. Of this you seem not insensible already, and therefore
fly away to your favourite supposition, that “they were not
cured at all; that the whole matter was a cheat from the
beginning to the end.” But by what arguments do you evince
this? The first is, “The Heathens pretended to do the
same.” Nay, and “managed the imposture with so much art,
that the Christians could neither deny nor detect it; but
insisted always that it was performed by demons, or evil
spirits.” (Ibid.) But still the Heathens maintained, “the
cures were wrought by their gods, by AEsculapius in parti
cular.” And where is the difference? seeing, as was observed
before, “the gods of the Heathens were but devils.”
3. But you say, “Although public monuments were erected
in proof and memory of these cures, at the time when they
were.performed, yet it is certain all those heathen miracles
were pure forgeries.” (Page 79.) How is it certain? If you
can swallow this without good proof, you are far more cre
dulous than I. I cannot believe that the whole body of the
Heathens, for so many generations, were utterly destitute of
common sense, any more than of common honesty. Why
should you fix such a charge on whole cities and countries?
You could have done no more, if they had been Christians!
4. But “diseases, though fatal and desperate, are oft sur
prisingly healed of themselves.” And therefore “we cannot
pay any great regard to such stories, unless we knew more pre
cisely in this case the real bounds between nature and miracle.”
(Ibid.) Sir, I understand you well. The drift of the argu
ment is easily seen. It points at the Master, as well as his
THE REV. D.R. MIDDLETON. 41
servants; and tends to prove that, after all this talk about
miraculous cures, we are not sure there were ever any in the
world. But it will do no harm. For, although we grant,
(1.) That some recover, even in seemingly desperate cases; and,
(2.) That we do not know, in any case, the precise bounds
between nature and miracle; yet it does not follow, Therefore
I cannot be assured there ever was a miracle of healing in the
world. To explain this by instance: I do not precisely know
how far nature may go in healing, that is, restoring sight to,
the blind; yet this I assuredly know, that if a man born blind
is restored to sight by a word, this is not nature, but miracle.
And to such a story, well attested, all reasonable men will pay
the highest regard.
5. The sum of what you have advanced on this head, is,
(1.) That the Heathens themselves had miraculous cures
among them. (2.) That oil may cure some diseases by its
natural efficacy. And, (3.) That we do not know the precise
bounds of nature. All this I allow. But all this will not
prove that no miraculous cures were performed, either by our
Lord and his Apostles, or by those who lived in the three
succeeding centuries.
Section III. 1. The Third of the miraculous powers said to
have been in the primitive Church, is that of casting out devils.
The testimonies concerning this are out of number, and as
plain as words can make them. To show, therefore, that all
these signify nothing, and that there were never any devils
cast out at all, neither by the Apostles, nor since the Apostles,
(for the argument proves both or neither,) is a task worthy of
you. And, to give you your just praise, you have here put
forth all your strength.
2. And yet I cannot but apprehend, there was a much
shorter way. Would it not have been readier to overthrow all
those testimonies at a stroke, by proving, there never was any
devil in the world? Then the whole affair of casting him out
had been at an end.
But it is in condescension to the weakness and prejudices
of mankind that you go less out of the common road, and only
observe, “that those who were said to be possessed of the
devil, may have been ill of the falling sickness.” And their
symptoms, you say, “seem to be nothing else but the ordinary
symptoms of an epilepsy.” (Page 81.)
If it be asked, But were “the specches and confessions of
42 LETTER TO
the devils, and their answering to all questions, nothing but
the ordinary symptoms of an epilepsy %' you take in a second
hypothesis, and account for these “by the arts of imposture,
and contrivance between the persons concerned in the act.”
(Page 82.)
But is not this something extraordinary, that men in
epileptic fits should be capable of so much art and contrivance?
To get over this difficulty, we are apt to suppose that art and
contrivance were the main ingredients; so that we are to add
only quantum sufficit of the epilepsy, and sometimes to leave
it out of the composition.
But the proof, Sir? where is the proof? I want a little of
that too. Instead of this, we have only another supposition:
“That all the Fathers were either induced by their prejudices
to give too hasty credit to these pretended possessions, or
carried away by their zeal to support a delusion which was
useful to the Christian cause.” (Ibid.)
I grant they were prejudiced in favour of the Bible; but
yet we cannot fairly conclude from hence, either that they
were one and all continually deceived by merely pretended
possessions; or that they would all lie for God,—a thing
absolutely forbidden in that book.
3. But “leaders of sects,” you say, “whatever principles
they pretend to, have seldom scrupled to use a commodious
lie.” (Page 83.) I observe you are quite impartial here.
You make no exception of age or nation. It is all one to you
whether your reader applies this to the son of Abdallah, or
the Son of Mary. And yet, Sir, I cannot but think there
was a difference. I fancy the Jew was an homester man than
the Arabian; and though Mahomet used many a commodious
lie, yet Jesus of Nazareth did not.
4. However, “Not one of these Fathers made any scruple
of using the hyperbolical style,” (that is, in plain English, of
lying,) “as an eminent writer of ecclesiastical history
declares.” (Ibid.) You should have said, an impartial writer.
For who would scruple that character to Mr. Le Clerc? And
yet I cannot take either his or your bare word for this. Be
pleased to produce a little proof. Hitherto you have proved
absolutely nothing on the head; but, as your manner is,
taken all for granted.
5. You next relate that famous story from Tertullian: “A
woman went to the theatre, and returned possessed with a
THE REV. DR. MIDDLETON. 43
devil. When the unclean spirit was asked how he dared to
assault a Christian, he answered, ‘I found her on my own
ground.’” (Ibid.) After relating another, which you
endeavour to account for naturally, you intimate that this
was a mere lie of Tertullian's. But how is that proved?
Why, “Tertullian was an utter enemy to plays and public
shows in the theatre.” He was so: But can we infer from
thence that he was an utter enemy to common honesty?
6. You add: “The Fathers themselves own that even the
Jews, yea, and the Heathens, cast out devils. Now, it will be
granted, that these Jewish and Heathen exorcists were mere
cheats and impostors. But the Fathers believed they really
cast them out. Now, if they could take their tricks for the
effects of a supernatural power, well might they be deceived
by their own impostors. Or they might think it convenient
to oppose one cheat to another.” (Pages 84, 87, 88.)
Deceived, say you, by their own impostors ? Why, I thought
they were the very men who set them to work! who opposed
one cheat to another! Apt scholars, who acted their part so
well, as even to deceive their masters! But, whatever the
Heathen were, we cannot grant that all the “Jewish exorcists
were impostors.” Whether the Heathens cast out devils or
not, it is sure the sons of the Jews cast them out. I mean,
upon supposition, that Jesus of Nazareth cast them out;
which is a point not here to be disputed.
7. But “it is very hard to believe what Origen declares, that
the devils used to possess and destroy cattle.” You might
have said, what Matthew and Mark declare concerning the
herd of swine; and yet we shall find you, by and by, believing
far harder things than this.
Before you subjoined the silly story of Hilarion and his
camel, you should, in candour, have informed your reader,
that it is disputed, whether the life of Hilarion was wrote by
St. Jerome or no. But, be it as it may, I have no concern
for either: For they did not live within the three first ages.
8. I know not what you have proved hitherto, though you
have affirmed many things, and intimated more. But now
we come to the strength of the cause, contained in your five
observations.
You observe, First, “that all the primitive accounts of
casting out devils, though given by different Fathers, and in
different ages, yet exactly agree with regard to all the main
44 LETTER, TO
circumstances.” (Page 91.) And this you apprehend to be a
mark of imposture. “It looks,” you say, “as if they copied
from each other !” Now, a vulgar reader would have
imagined that any single account of this kind must be
rendered much more (not less) credible, by parallel accounts
of what many had severally seen, at different times, and in
different places.
9. You observe, Secondly, “that the persons thus
possessed were called sy/aspiu.uffol, ‘ventriloquists;’” (some
of them were;) “because they were generally believed to
speak out of the belly. Now, there are, at this day,” you
say, “those who, by art and practice, can speak in the same
manner. If we suppose, then, that there were artists of this
kind among the ancient Christians, how easily, by a corre
spondence between the ventriloquist and the exorcist, might
they delude the most sensible of their audience 1” (Page 92.)
But what did the ventriloquist do with his epilepsy in the
mean time? You must not let it go, because many of the
circumstances wherein all these accounts agree cannot be
tolerably accounted for without it. And yet, how will you
make these two agree? It is a point worthy your serious
consideration.
But cheats, doubtless, they were, account for it who can.
Yet it is strange none of the Heathens should find them out;
that the imposture should remain quite undiscovered till
fourteen hundred years after the impostors were dead! He
must have a very large faith who can believe this; who can
suppose that not one of all those impostors should, either
through inadvertence, or in the midst of tortures and death,
have once intimated any such thing.
10. You observe, Thirdly, “that many demoniacs could
not be cured by all the power of the exorcists; and that the
cures which were pretended to be wrought on any were but
temporary, were but the cessation of a particular fit or access
of the distemper. This,” you say, “is evident from the
testimony of antiquity itself, and may be clearly collected from
the method of treating them in the ancient Church.” (Ibid.)
Sir, you are the most obliging disputant in the world: For
you continually answer your own arguments. Your last
observation confuted all that you had advanced before. And
now you are so kind as to confute that. For if, after all, these
demoniacs were real epileptics, and that in so high a degree as
Thi E REV. DR. MiD DLETON. 45
to be wholly incurable, what becomes of their art and practice,
and of the very good correspondence between the ventriloquist
and the exorcist?
Having allowed you your supposition just so long as may
suffice to confute yourself, I must now observe, it is not true.
For all that is evident from the testimony of antiquity, is this:
That although many demoniacs were wholly delivered, yet
some were not, even in the third century; but continued
months or years, with only intervals of ease, before they were
entirely set at liberty.
11. You observe, Fourthly, “that great numbers of
demoniacs subsisted in those early ages, whose chief habita
stion was in a part of the church, where, as in a kind of
hospital, they were under the care of the exorcists; which will
account for the confidence of those challenges made to the
Heathens by the Christians, to come and see how they could
drive the devils out of them, while they kept such numbers
of them in constant pay; always ready for the show; tried
and disciplined by your exorcists to groan and howl, and give
proper answers to all questions.” (Pages 94, 95.)
So now the correspondence between the ventriloquist and the
exorcist is grown more close than ever! But the misfortune
is, this observation, likewise, wholly overthrows that which
went before it. For if all the groaning and howling, and other
symptoms, were no more than what they “were disciplined to
by their exorcists;” (page 95;) then it cannot be, that “many
of them could not possibly be cured by all the power of those
exorcists 1” (Page 92.) What! could they not possibly be
taught to know their masters; and when to end, as well as to
begin, the show? One would think that the cures wrought
upon these might have been more than temporary. Nay, it
is surprising, that, while they had such numbers of them, they
should ever suffer the same person to show twice.
12. You observe, Fifthly, “that, whereas this power of
casting out devils had hitherto been in the hands only of the
meaner part of the laity;” (that wants proof;) “it was, about
the year 367, put under the direction of the Clergy; it being
then decreed by the Council of Laodicea, that none should be
exorcists but those appointed (or ordained) by the Bishop.
But no sooner was this done, even by those who favoured and
desired to support it, than the gift itself gradually decreased
and expired.” (Page 95.)
46 LETTER. To
You here overthrow, not only your immediately preceding
observation, (as usual,) but likewise what you have observed
elsewhere,—that the exorcists began to be ordained “about
the middle of the third century.” (Page 86.) If so, what need
of decreeing it now, above an hundred years after? Again:
If the exorcists were ordained an hundred years before this
Council sat, what change was made by the decree of the
Council? Or how came the power of casting out devils to cease
upon it? You say, The Bishops still favoured and desired to
support it. Why, then, did they not support it? It must
have been they (not the poor exorcists, who were but a degree
above sextons) who had hitherto kept such numbers of them
in pay. What was become of them now? Were all the
groaners and howlers dead, and no more to be procured for
money? Or rather, did not the Bishops, think you, grow
covetous as they grew rich, and so kept fewer and fewer of
them in pay, till at length the whole business dropped?
13. These are your laboured objections against the great
promise of our Lord, “In my name shall they cast out
devils;” whereby (to make sure work) you strike at him and
his Apostles, just as much as at the primitive Fathers. But,
by a strange jumble of ideas in your head, you would prove
so much, that you prove nothing. By attempting to show all
who claimed this power to be at once both fools and knaves,
you have spoiled your whole cause, and, in the event, neither
shown them to be one nor the other; as the one half of your
argument all along just serves to overthrow the other. So
that, after all, the ancient testimonies, touching this gift,
remain firm and unshaken.
Section IV. l. You told us above, that “the fourth miraculous
gift was that of prophesying; the fifth, of seeing visions; the
sixth, of discovering the secrets of men.” (Page 72.) But
here you jumble them all together, telling us, “The next
miraculous gift is that of prophetic visions, and ecstatic trances,”
(ecstatic ecstasies, you might have said,) “and the discovery
of men's hearts.” (Page 96.) But why do you thrust all
three into one? Because, you say, “these seem to be the
fruit of one spirit.” Most certainly they are, whether it was
the Spirit of Truth, or (as you suppose) the spirit of delusion.
2. However, it is the second of these on which you chiefly
dwell, (the fifth of those you before enumerated,) taking but
little notice of the fourth, “foretelling things to come,” and
THE REV. D.R. MiDDLETON. 47
none at all of the sixth, “discovering the secrets of men.”
The testimonies, therefore, for these remain in full force, as
you do not even attempt to invalidate them. With regard to
visions or ecstasies, you observe, First, that Tertullian calls
ecstasy “a temporary loss of senses.” (Page 97.) It was so,
of the outward senses, which were then locked up. You
observe, Secondly, that “Suidas” (a very primitive writer,
who lived between eight and nine hundred years after Ter
tullian) “says, that of all the kinds of madness, that of the
Poets and Prophets was alone to be wished for.” I am at a
loss to know what this is brought to prove. The question is,
Were there visions in the primitive Church? You observe,
Thirdly, that Philo the Jew says, (Iliterally translate his words,
which you do not; for it would not answer your purpose,)
“When the divine light shines, the human sets; but when
that sets, this rises. This uses to befall the Prophets.” (Page
98.) Well, Sir, and what is this to the question? Why,
“from these testimonies,” you say, “we may collect, that the
vision or ecstasy of the primitive Church was of the same kind
with those of the Delphic Pythia, or the Cumaean Sibyl.”
Well collected indeed! But I desire a little better
testimony than either that of Philo the Jew, or Suidas, a
lexicographer of the eleventh century, before I believe this.
How little Tertullian is to be regarded on this head you
yourself show in the very next page.
3. You say, Fourthly, “Montanus and his associates were
the authors of these trances. They first raised this spirit
of enthusiasm in the Church, and acquired great credit by
their visions and ecstasies.” Sir, you forget; they did not
“raise this spirit,” but rather Joel and St. Peter; according
to whose words, the “young men saw visions,” before
Montanus was born.
4. You observe, Fifthly, how Tertullian was “imposed
upon by the craft of ecstatic visionaries,” (page 99,) and then
fall upon Cyprian with all your might: Your objections to
whom we shall now consider:—
And, First, you lay it down as a postulatum, that he was
“fond of power and episcopal authority.” (Page 101.) I
cannot grant this, Sir: I must have some proof; else this,
and all you infer from it, will go for nothing.
You say, Secondly, “In all questionable points of doctrine
or discipline, which he had a mind to introduce into the
48 LETTER TO
Christian worship, we find him constantly appealing to the
testimony of visions and divine revelations. Thus he says to
Caecilius, that he was divinely admonished to mix water with
wine in the sacrament, in order to render it effectual.”
You set out unhappily enough. For this can never be a
proof of Cyprian’s appealing to visions and revelations in order
to introduce questionable points of doctrine or discipline into
the Christian worship; because this point was unquestionable,
and could not then be “introduced into the Christian wor
ship,” having had a constant place therein, as you yourself
have showed, (Introductory Discourse, p. 57) at least from the
time of Justin Martyr.
Indeed, neither Justin nor Cyprian use those words, “In
order to render it effectual.” They are an ingenious and
honest addition of your own, in order to make something out
of nothing.
5. I observe you take much the same liberty in your next
quotation from Cyprian. “He threatens,” you say, “to
execute what he was ordered to do ‘against them in a
vision.’” (Page 102.) Here also the last words, “in a
vision,” are an improvement upon the text. Cyprian’s words
are, “I will use that admonition which the Lord commands
me to use.”* But neither was this in order to introduce
any questionable point, either of doctrine or discipline; no
more than his using the same threat to Pupianus, who had
spoken ill of him and left his communion.
6. You go on: “He says likewise, he was admonished of
God to ordain one Numidicus, a Confessor, who had been left
for dead, half burnt and buried in stones.” (Pages 103, 104.)
True, but what “questionable point of doctrine” or discipline
did he introduce hereby ? or by ordaining Celerinus; “who
was over-ruled and compelled by a divine vision to accept that
office?” So you affirm Cyprian says. But Cyprian says it
not; at least, not in those words which you cite in the
margin: which, literally translated, run thus: “I recommend
to you Celerinus, joined to our Clergy, not by human suffrage,
but by the divine favour.”f
“In another letter, speaking of Aurelius, whom he had
ordained a Reader, he says to his Clergy and people, “In ordain
ing Clergy, my dearest brethren, I use to consult you first; but
* Utar ea admonitione, quá me Dominus uti jubet. Epis. 9.
t Non humaná suffragatione, sed diviná dignatione, conjunctum. Epis. 34.
THE REW, DR, MIDisileTON. 49
there is no need to wait for human testimonies, when the
divine suffrage has been already signified.’”
An impartial man would wonder what you could infer from
these five passages put together. Why, by the help of a short
postulatum, “He was fond of power,” (you have as much
ground to say, “He was fond of bloodshed,”) you will make
it plain, “this was all a trick to enlarge his episcopal
authority.” But as that postulatum is not allowed, you have
all your work to begin again.
7. Hitherto then the character of Cyprian is unhurt; but
now you are resolved to blow it up at once. So you proceed :
“The most memorable effect of any of his visions was his
flight from his Church in the time of persecution. He affirms,
that he was commanded to retire by a special revelation from
heaven. Yet this plea was a mere fiction, contrived to quiet
the scandal which was raised by his flight; and is confuted by
himself, where he declares, it was the advice of Tertullus
which prevailed with him to withdraw.” (Pages 104, 105.)
You here charge Cyprian with confuting himself, in saying,
he “withdrew by the advice of Tertullus;” whereas he had
“before affirmed, that he was commanded to retire by a special
revelation from heaven.” Indeed he had not; there is no
necessity at all for putting this construction upon those words,
“The Lord who commanded me to retire;” which may with
out any force be understood of the written command, “When
they persecute you in this city, flee ye into another.” (Matt. x.
23.) It is not therefore clear, that this plea of a special revelation
was ever advanced. And if it was advanced, it still remains
to be proved, that “it was nothing else but a mere fiction.”
8. Your citing his editor here, obliges me to add a remark,
for which you give continual occasion: If either Rigalt, Mr.
Dodwel's Dr. Grabe, Mr. Thirlby, or any editor of the Fathers,
ever drops an expression to the disadvantage of the author whom
he publishes or illustrates, this you account so much treasure,
and will surely find a time to expose it to public view. And all
these passages you recite as demonstration. These are doubt
less mere oracles; although when the same person speaks in
favour of the Father, his authority is not worth a straw. But
you have “none of those arts which are commonly employed
by disputants to palliate a bad cause !” (Preface, p. 31.)
9. What you relate of Dionysius, Bishop of Alexandria, you
have not from himself, but only from one who lived near a
50 LETTER TO
hundred years after Dionysius was dead. Therefore he is
not at all accountable for it; as neither am I for any vision
of St. Jerome. But I am concerned in the consequence you
draw from it: “If this was a fiction, so were Cyprian's too.”
That will not follow. Many objections may lie against the
one, which have no place with regard to the other.
10. You now bring forth your grand discovery, that “all
the visions of those days were contrived, or authorized at least,
by the leading men of the Church. For they were all applied,
either, (1.) To excuse the conduct of particular persons, in
some instances of it liable to censure; or, (2.) To enforce
some doctrine or discipline pressed by some, but not relished
by others; or, (3.) To confirm things not only frivolous, but
sometimes even superstitious and hurtful.” (Page 109.)
Well, Sir, here is the proposition. But where is the proof?
I hope we shall have it in your next “Free Inquiry;” and
that you will then give us a few instances of such applications,
from the writers of the three first centuries.
11. Being not disposed to do this at present, you fall again
upon the poor “heretic Montanus; who first gave a vogue”
(as you phrase it) “to visions and ecstasies in the Christian
Church.” (Page 110.) So you told us before. But we cannot
believe it yet; because Peter and Paul tell us the contrary.
Indeed, you do not now mention Montanus because it is any
thing to the question, but only to make way for observing, that
those who wrote against him “employed such arguments against
his prophecy as shake the credit of all prophecy. For Epipha
nius makes this the very criterion between a true and a false
prophet, ‘that the true had no ecstasies, constantly retained
his senses, and with firmness of mind apprehended and uttered
the divine oracles.’” Sir, have you not mistook? Have you
not transcribed one sentence in the margin, and translated
another? That sentence which stands in your margin is this:
“When there was need, the saints of God among the Prophets
prophesied all things with the true Spirit, and with a sound
understanding and reasonable mind.” Now, it is difficult to
find out how this comes to “shake the credit of all prophecy.”
12. Why thus: “Before the Montanists had brought those
ecstasies into disgrace, the prophecy of the orthodox too was
exerted in ecstasy. And so were the prophecies of the Old
Testament, according to the current opinion of those earlier
days.” (Page 111.)
THE REV. D.R. MIDDLETON. 51
That this was then “the current opinion,” you bring three
citations to prove. But if you could cite three Fathers more
during the three first centuries, expressly affirming that the
Prophets were all out of their senses, I would not take their
word. For though I take most of the Fathers to have been
wise and good men, yet I know none of them were infallible.
But do even these three expressly"affirm it? No, not one of
them; at least in the words you have cited. From Athena
goras you cite only part of a sentence, which, translated as
literally as it will well bear, runs thus: “Who in an ecstasy of
their own thoughts, being moved by the Divine Spirit, spoke
the things with which they were inspired, even as a piper
breathes into a pipe.” Does Athenagoras expressly affirm in
these words, that the Prophets were “transported out of
their senses?” I hope, Sir, you do not understand Greek
If so, you show here only a little harmless ignorance.
13. From Justin Martyr also you cite but part of a
sentence. He speaks, very nearly, thus:-o
“That the Spirit of God, descending from heaven, and
using righteous men as the quill strikes the harp or lyre, may
reveal unto us the knowledge of divine and heavenly things.”
And does Justin expressly affirm in these words, that all the
Prophets were “transported out of their senses?”
Tertullian’s words are : “A man being in the Spirit,
especially when he beholds the glory of God, must needs lose
sense.”* Now, as it is not plain that he means hereby, lose
his understanding, (it being at least equally probable, that he
intends no more than, losing for the time the use of his out
ward senses,) neither can it be said that Tertullian expressly
affirms, “The Prophets were all out of their senses.” There
fore you have not so much as one Father to vouch for what
you say was “the current opinion in those days.”
14. I doubt not but all men of learning will observe a
circumstance which holds throughout all your quotations.
The strength of your argument constantly lies in a loose and
paraphrastical manner of translating. The strength of mine
lies in translating all in the most close and literal manner;
so that closeness of translation strengthens mine, in the same
proportion as it weakens your arguments; a plain proof of
what you elsewhere observe, that you use “no subtle
refinements or forced constructions.” (Preface, p. 31.)
* Necesse est, ercidat sensu.
E 2
52 LETTER TO
15. But to return to Cyprian: “I cannot forbear,” you say,
“relating two or three more of his wonderful stories. The first
is, A man who had denied Christ was presently struck dumb:
The second, A woman who had done so was seized by an unclean
spirit, and soon after died in great anguish: The third, of which
he says he was an eye-witness, is this,—The heathen Magistrates
gave to a Christian infant part of what had been offered to an
idol. When the Deacon forced the consecrated wine on this
child, it was immediately seized with convulsions and vomiting;
as was a woman who had apostatized, upon taking the conse
crated elements.” (Pages 112, 113.) The other two relations
Cyprian does not affirm of his own personal knowledge.
“Now, what can we think,” say you, “of these strange
stories, but that they were partly forged, partly dressed up in
this tragical form, to support the discipline of the Church in
these times of danger and trial?” (Page 115.)
Why, many will think that some of them are true, even in
the manner they are related; and that if any of them are not,
Cyprian thought they were, and related them in the sincerity
of his heart. Nay, perhaps some will think that the wisdom
of God might, “in those times of danger and trial,” work
things of this kind, for that very end, “to support the dis
cipline of the Church.” And till you show the falsehood, or
at least the improbability, of this, Cyprian's character stands
untainted; not only as a man of sense, (which you yourself
allow,) but likewise of eminent integrity; and consequently
it is beyond dispute, that visions, the fifth miraculous gift,
remained in the Church after the days of the Apostles.
Section V. 1. The sixth of the miraculous gifts which you
enumerated above, namely, “the discernment of spirits,” you
just name, and then entirely pass over. The seventh is, that
of “expounding the Scriptures.” (Page 116.) You tack to it,
“or the mysteries of God.” But, inasmuch as it is not yet
agreed (as was intimated above) whether this be the same
gift, it may just as well be left out.
2. Now, as to this, you say, “There is no trace of it to be
found since the days of the Apostles. For even in the second
and third centuries, a most senseless and extravagant method
of expounding them prevailed. For which when we censure
any particular Father, his apologists with one voice allege,
‘This is to be charged to the age wherein he lived, which
could not relish or endure any better.’”
THE REV. DR, MIDDLETON, 53
I doubt much, whether you can produce one single apologist
for any “ridiculous comment on sacred writ,” who anywhere
“alleges, that the second or third century could not relish or
endure any better.” But if they were all to say this with one
voice, yet no reasonable man could believe them. For it is
notoriously contrary to matter of fact. It may be allowed,
that some of these Fathers, being afraid of too literal a way
of expounding the Scriptures, leaned sometimes to the other
extreme. Yet nothing can be more unjust than to infer from
hence, “that the age in which they lived could not relish or
endure any but senseless, extravagant, enthusiastic, ridiculous
comments on sacred writ.”
Will you say, that all the comments on Scripture, still to
be found in the writings of Ignatius, Polycarp, Athenagoras,
or even of Origen and Clemens Alexandrinus, are senseless
and extravagant? If not, this charge must fall to the ground;
it being manifest, that even “the age in which they lived”
could both “endure and relish” sound, sensible, rational (and
yet spiritual) comments on holy writ.
Yet this extravagant charge you have repeated over and
over in various parts of your work; thrusting it upon your
reader in season and out of season: How fairly, let all candid
men judge.
3. Touching the miraculous gift of expounding Scripture,
you say, “Justin Martyr affirms, it was conferred on him
by the special grace of God.” (Page 117.) I cannot find
where he affirms this. Not in the words you cite, which,
literally translated, (as was observed before,) run thus: “He
hath revealed to us whatsoever things we have understood by
his grace from the Scriptures also.” You seem conscious,
these words do not prove the point, and therefore eke them
out with those of Monsieur Tillemont. But his own words,
and no other, will satisfy me. I cannot believe it, unless
from his own mouth.
4. Meantime, I cannot but observe an odd circumstance,
—that you are here, in the abundance of your strength, con
futing a proposition which (whether it be true or false) not
one of your antagonists affirms. You are labouring to prove,
“there was not in the primitive Church any such miraculous
gift as that of expounding the Scriptures.” Pray, Sir, who
says there was ? Not Justin Martyr; not one among all those
Fathers whom you have quoted as witnesses of the miraculous
54 LETTER TO
gifts, from the tenth to the eighteenth page of your “Inquiry.”
If you think they do, I am ready to follow you step by step,
through every quotation you have made.
5. No, nor is this mentioned in any enumeration of the
miraculous gifts which I can find in the Holy Scriptures.
Prophecy indeed is mentioned more than once, by the Apostles,
as well as the Fathers. But the context shows, where it is
promised as a miraculous gift, it means the foretelling things
to come. All therefore which you say on this head is a mere
ignoratio elenchi, “a mistake of the question to be proved.”
Section VI. 1. The Eighth and last of the miraculous gifts
you enumerated was the gift of tongues. And this, it is
sure, was claimed by the primitive Christians; for Irenaeus
says expressly, “‘We hear many in the Church speaking
with all kinds of tongues.’ And yet,” you say, “this was
granted only on certain special occasions, and then withdrawn
again from the Apostles themselves: So that in the ordinary
course of their ministry, they were generally destitute of it.
This,” you say, “I have shown elsewhere.” (Page 119.) I
presume, in some treatise which I have not seen.
2. But Irenaeus, who declares that “many had this gift in
his days, yet owns he had it not himself.” This is only a
proof that the case was then the same as when St. Paul
observed, long before, “Are all workers of miracles? Have
all the gifts of healing? Do all speak with tongues?”
(1 Cor. xii. 29, 30.) No, not even when those gifts were
shed abroad in the most abundant manner.
3. “But no other Father has made the least claim to it.”
(Page 120.) Perhaps none of those whose writings are now
extant; at least, not in those writings which are extant. But
what are these in comparison of those which are lost? And
how many were burning and shining lights within three
hundred years after Christ, who wrote no account of themselves
at all; at least, none which has come to our hands? But
who are they that “speak of it as a gift peculiar to the times
of the Apostles?” You say, “There is not a single Father
who ventures to speak of it in any other manner.” (Ibid.)
Well, bring but six Ante-Nicene Fathers who speak of it in
this manner, and I will give up the whole point.
4. But you say, “After the apostolic times, there is not, in
all history, one instance, even so much as mentioned, of any
particular person who ever exercised this gift.” (Ibid.’ You
THE REV. DR. MIDD LETON, 55
must mean, either that the Heathens have mentioned no
instance of this kind, (which is not at all surprising,) or that
Irenaeus does not mention the names of those many persons
who in his time exercised this gift. And this also may be
allowed without affecting in anywise the credibility of his
testimony concerning them.
5. I must take notice here of another of your postulatums,
which leads you into many mistakes. With regard to past
ages, you continually take this for granted: “What is not
recorded was not done.” But this is by no means a self
evident axiom: Nay, possibly it is not true. For there may
be many reasons in the depth of the wisdom of God, for his
doing many things at various times and places, either by his
natural or supernatural power, which were never recorded at
all. And abundantly more were recorded once, and that with
the fullest evidence, whereof, nevertheless, we find no certain
evidence now, at the distance of fourteen hundred years.
6. Perhaps this may obtain in the very case before us.
Many may have spoken with new tongues, of whom this is not
recorded; at least, the records are lost in a course of so many
years: Nay, it is not only possible that it may be so, but it is
absolutely certain that it is so; and you yourself must acknow
ledge it; for you acknowledge that the Apostles, when in
strange countries, spoke with strange tongues; that St. John,
for instance, when in Asia Minor, St. Peter, when in Italy, (if
he was really there,) and the other Apostles, when in other
countries, in Parthia, Media, Phrygia, Pamphylia, spoke each
to the natives of each, in their own tongues, the wonderful
works of God. And yet there is no authentic record of this:
There is not in all history, one well-attested instance of any
particular Apostle's exercising this gift in any country what
soever. Now, Sir, if your axiom were allowed, what would
be the consequence? Even that the Apostles themselves no
more spoke with tongues than any of their successors.
7. I need, therefore, take no trouble about your subsequent
reasonings, seeing they are built upon such a foundation.
Only I must observe an historical mistake which occurs toward
the bottom of your next page. Since the Reformation, you
say, “This gift has never once been heard of, or pretended
to, by the Romanists themselves.” (Page 122.) But has it
been pretended to (whether justly or not) by no others, though
not by the Romanists? Has it “never once been heard of”
56 LETTER. To
since that time? Sir, your memory fails you again: It has
undoubtedly been pretended to, and that at no great distance
either from our time or country. It has been heard of more
than once, no farther off than the valleys of Dauphiny. Nor
is it yet fifty years ago since the Protestant inhabitants of
those valleys so loudly pretended to this and other miraculous
powers, as to give much disturbance to Paris itself. And how
did the King of France confute that pretence, and prevent its
being heard any more? Not by the pen of his scholars,
but by (a truly heathen way) the swords and bayonets of his
dragoons.
8. You close this head with a very extraordinary thought :
“The gift of tongues may,” you say, “be considered as a
proper test or criterion for determining the miraculous preten
sions of all Churches. If among their extraordinary gifts
they cannot show us this, they have none to show which are
genuine.” (Ibid.)
Now, I really thought it had been otherwise. I thought
it had been an adjudged rule in the case, “All these worketh
one and the self-same Spirit, dividing to every man severally
as he will;” and as to every man, so to every Church, every
collective body of men. But if this be so, then yours is no
proper test for determining the pretensions of all Churches;
seeing He who worketh as He will, may, with your good
leave, give the gift of tongues, where He gives no other; and
may see abundant reasons so to do, whether you and I see
them or not. For perhaps we have not always known the
mind of the Lord; not being of the number of his counsellors.
On the other hand, he may see good to give many other gifts,
where it is not his will to bestow this. Particularly where it
would be of no use; as in a Church where all are of one mind,
and all speak the same language.
9. You have now finished, after a fashion, what you pro
posed to do in the Fourth place, which was, “to review all the
several kinds of miraculous gifts which are pretended to have
been in the primitive Church.” Indeed you have dropped
one or two of them by the way: Against the rest you have
brought forth your strong reasons. Those reasons have been
coolly examined. And now let every impartial man, every
person of true and unbiassed reason, calmly consider and judge,
whether you have made out one point of all that you took in
hand; and whether some miracles of each kind may not have
THE REV. DR. MIDDLETON. 57
been wrought in the ancient Church, for anything you have
advanced to the contrary.
10. From page 127 to page 158, you relate miracles said to
be wrought in the fourth century. I have no concern with
these; but I must weigh an argument which you intermix
therewith again and again. It is in substance this: “If we
cannot believe the miracles attested by the later Fathers, then
we ought not to believe those which are attested by the earliest
writers of the Church.” I answer, The consequence is not
good; because the case is not the same with the one and with
the other. Several objections, which do not hold with regard
to the earlier, may lie against the later, miracles; drawn either
from the improbability of the facts themselves, such as we
have no precedent of in holy writ; from the incompetency of
the instruments said to perform them, such as bones, relics, or
departed saints; or from the gross “credulity of a prejudiced,
or the dishonesty of an interested, relater.” (Page 145.)
11. One or other of these objections holds against most of
the later, though not the earlier, miracles. And if only one
holds, it is enough; it is ground sufficient for making the
difference. If, therefore, it was true that there was not a
single Father of the fourth age, who was not equally pious
with the best of the more ancient, still we might consistently
reject most of the miracles of the fourth, while we allowed
those of the preceding ages; both because of the far greater
improbability of the facts themselves, and because of the
incompetency of the instruments. (Page 159.)
But it is not true, that “the Fathers of the fourth age,”
whom you mention, were equally pious with the best of the
preceding ages. Nay, according to your account, (which I
shall not now contest,) they were not pious at all. For you
say, “They were wilful, habitual liars.” And, if so, they
had not a grain of piety. Now, that the earlier Fathers were
not such has been shown at large; though, indeed, you
complimented them with the same character. Consequently,
whether these later Fathers are to be believed or no, we may
safely believe the former; who dared not to do evil that good
might come, or to lie either for God or man.
12. I had not intended to say anything more concerning
any of the miracles of the later ages; but your way of
accounting for one, said to have been wrought in the fifth, is
so extremely curious that I cannot pass it by.
58 LETTER, TO
The story, it seems, is this: “Hunneric, an Arian Prince,
in his persecution of the orthodox in Afric, ordered the
tongues of a certain society of them to be cut out by the roots.
But, by a surprising instance of God’s good providence, they
were enabled to speak articulately and distinctly without
their tongues. And so continuing to make open profession
of the same doctrine, they became not only Preachers, but
living witnesses, of its truth.” (Page 182.)
Do not mistake me, Sir: I have no design at all to vouch
for the truth of this miracle. I leave it just as I find it.
But what I am concerned with is, your manner of accounting
for it.
13. And, First, you say, “It may not improbably be
supposed, that though their tongues were ordered to be cut
to the roots, yet the sentence might not be so strictly executed
as not to leave in some of them such a share of that organ as
was sufficient, in a tolerable degree, for the use of speech.”
(Page 183.)
So you think, Sir, if only an inch of a man’s tongue were
to be neatly taken off, he would be able to talk tolerably
well, as soon as the operation was over.
But the most marvellous part is still behind. For you
add, “To come more close to the point: If we should allow
that the tongues of these Confessors were cut away to the
very roots, what will the learned Doctor say, if this boasted
miracle should be found at last to be no miracle at all ?”
(Page 184.)
“Say?” Why, that you have more skill than all the
“strolling wonder-workers” of the three first centuries put
together.
But to the point: Let us see how you will set about it.
Why, thus: “The tongue” (as you justly, though keenly,
observe) “has generally been considered as absolutely neces
sary to the use of speech; so that, to hear men talk without
it, might easily pass for a miracle in that credulous age. Yet
there was always room to doubt, whether there was anything
miraculous in it or not. But we have an instance in the
present century, which clears up all our doubts, and entirely
decides the question: I mean, the case of a girl born without
a tongue, who talked as easily and distinctly as if she had
had one; an account of which is given in the Memoirs of the
Academy of Sciences at Paris.” (Ibid.)
THE REV. DR. MIDDLETON, 59
14. And can you really believe this, that a girl “spoke
distinctly and easily” without any tongue at all? And, after
avowing this belief, do you gravely talk of other men's
credulity? I wonder that such a volunteer in faith should
stagger at anything. Doubtless, were it related as natural
only, not miraculous, you could believe that a man might see
without eyes.
Surely there is something very peculiar in this; something
extraordinary, though not miraculous; that a man who is too
wise to believe the Bible, should believe everything but the
Bible! should swallow any tale, so God be out of the
question, though ever so improbable, ever so impossible !
15. “I have now,” you say, “thrown together all which I
had collected for the support of my argument;” (page 187;)
after a lame recapitulation of which you add with an air of
triumph and satisfaction: “I wish the Fathers the ablest
advocates which Popery itself can afford; for Protestantism,
I am sure, can supply none whom they would choose to
retain in their cause; none who can defend them without
contradicting their own profession and disgracing their own
character; or produce anything, but what deserves to be
laughed at, rather than answered.” (Pages 188, 189.)
Might it not be well, Sir, not to be quite so sure yet? You
may not always have the laugh on your side. You are not yet
infallibly assured, but that even Protestantism may produce
something worth an answer. There may be some Protestants,
for aught you know, who have a few grains of common sense
left, and may find a way to defend, at least the Ante-Nicene
Fathers, without “disgracing their own character.” Even
such an one as I have faintly attempted this, although I
neither have, nor expect to have, any preferment, not even to
be a Lambeth Chaplain; which if Dr. Middleton is not, it is
not his own fault.-
V. l. The last thing you proposed was, “to refute some of
the most plausible objections which have been hitherto made.”
To what you have offered on this head, I must likewise
attempt a short reply.
You say, “It is objected, First, that by the character I have
given of the Fathers, the authority of the books of the New
Testament, which were transmitted to us through their hands,
will be rendered precarious and uncertain.” (Page 190.)
After a feint of confuting it, you frankly acknowledge the
60 LETTER TO
whole of this objection. “I may venture,” you say, “to
declare, that if this objection be true, it cannot hurt my
argument. For if it be natural and necessary, that the craft
and credulity of witnesses should always detract from the
credit of their testimony, then who can help it? And if this
charge be proved on the Fathers, it must be admitted, how
far soever the consequences may reach.” (Page 192.)
“If it be proved !” Very true. If that charge against
the Fathers were really and substantially proved, the authority
of the New Testament would be at an end, so far as it
depends on one kind of evidence. But that charge is not
proved. Therefore even the traditional authority of the
New Testament is as firm as ever.
2. “It is objected,” you say, “Secondly, that all suspicion
of fraud in the case of the primitive miracles is excluded by
that public appeal and challenge which the Christian apolo
gists make to their enemies the Heathens, to come and see
with their own eyes the reality of the facts which they
attest.” (Page 193.)
You answer: “This objection has no real weight with any
who are acquainted with the condition of the Christians in
those days.” You then enlarge (as it seems, with a peculiar
pleasure) on the general contempt and odium they lay under,
from the first appearance of Christianity in the world, till it
was established by the civil power. (Pages 194–196.)
“In these circumstances, it cannot be imagined,” you say,
“that men of figure and fortune would pay any attention to
the apologies or writings of a sect so utterly despised.” (Page
197.) But, Sir, they were hated, as well as despised; and that
by the great vulgar, as well as the small. And this very hatred
would naturally prompt them to examine the ground of the
challenges daily repeated by them they hated; were it only,
that, by discovering the fraud, (which they wanted neither
opportunity nor skill to do, had there been any,) they might
have had a better pretence for throwing the Christians to the
lions, than because the Nile did not, or the Tiber did, overflow.
3. You add: “Much less can we believe that the Emperor
or Senate of Rome should take any notice of those apologies,
or even know indeed that any such were addressed to them.”
(Ibid.)
Why, Sir, by your account, you would make us believe,
that all the Emperors and Senate together were as “senseless,
ThE REV. DR. MIDDLETON, 61
stupid a race of blockheads and brutes,” as even the
Christians themselves.
But hold. You are going to prove it too: “For,” say you,
“should the like case happen now, that any Methodist,
Moravian, or French prophet,” (right skilfully put together,)
“should publish an apology for his brethren, addressed to the
King and Parliament; is it not wholly improbable, that the
Government would pay any regard to it?” You should add,
(to make the parallel complete,) “ or know that any such was
addressed to them.”
No: I conceive the improbability supposed lies wholly on
the other side. Whatever the Government of heathen Rome
was, (which I presume you will not depreciate,) the Govern
ment of England is remarkable for tenderness to the very
meanest subject. It is therefore not improbable in the least,
that an address from some thousands of those subjects, how
contemptible soever they were generally esteemed, would not
be totally disregarded by such a Government. But that they
should “not know that any such had been addressed to
them,” is not only improbable, but morally impossible.
If therefore it were possible for the Heathens to “have a
worse opinion of the ancient Christians than we,” you say,
“have of our modern fanatics,” still it is utterly incredible
that the Roman Government should, not only “take no
notice of their apologies,” but “not even know that any such
were addressed to them.”
4. “But the publishing books was more expensive then
than it is now; and therefore we cannot think the Christians
of those days were able to provide such a number of them as was
sufficient for the information of the public.” (Pages 198, 199.)
Nay, if they were not able to provide themselves food and
raiment, they would be sure to provide a sufficient number of
these; sufficient, at least, for the information of the Emperor
and Senate, to whom those apologies were addressed. And how
great a number, do you suppose, might suffice for them? How
many hundred or thousand copies? I apprehend the Emperor
would be content with one; and one more would be needful
for the Senate. Now, I really believe the Christians of those days
were able to provide both these copies; nay, and even two more;
if it should have fallen out, that two or three Emperors were on
the throne; even though we should suppose that in Tertullian’s
time there were but forty thousand of them in all Rome.
62 LETTER. To
5. However, you plunge on: “Since, then, the Christians
were not able to bear the expense of copying them,” (whether
the Heathens were disposed to buy them or no, is at present
out of the question,) “there is great reason to believe, that
their apologies, how gravely soever addressed to Emperors and
Senates, lay unknown for many years.” (Ibid.) There is no
great reason to believe it from anything you have advanced
yet. You add: “Especially when the publishing of them
was not only expensive, but so criminal also, as to expose
them often to danger, and even to capital punishment.”
In very deed, Sir, I am sometimes inclined to suspect that
you are yourself related to certain ancient Fathers, (notwith
standing the learned quotations which adorn your margin,)
who used to say, Graecum est: Non potest legi.* You lay
me under an almost invincible temptation to think so upon
this very occasion. For what could induce you, if you knew
what he said, to place at the bottom of this very page a
passage from one of those apologists, Justin Martyr, which
so clearly confutes your own argument? The words are:
“Although death be determined against those who teach, or
even confess, the name of Christ, we both embrace and teach
it everywhere. And if you also receive these words as enemies,
you can do no more than kill us.”t Could danger then, or
the fear of “capital punishment,” restrain those Christians
from presenting these apologies? No; capital punishment
was no terror to them, who daily offered themselves to the
flames, till the very heathen butchers themselves were tired
with slaughtering them.
There can therefore no shadow of doubt remain, with any
cool and impartial man, but that these apologies were
presented to the most eminent Heathens, to the Magistrates,
the Senate, the Emperors. Nor, consequently, is there the
least room to doubt of the truth of the facts therein asserted;
seeing the apologists constantly desired their enemies “to
come and see them with their own eyes;”—a hazard which
those “crafty men” would never have run, had not the facts
themselves been infallibly certain. This objection then
* It is Greek: It cannot be read.–EDIT.
+ Kaureo Savars opio 6evros kara raw ötöaakovrov, m oxals ouoMo'yevrov To ovoua
rs Xpiss, muets wavlaxs kai agraçoueða kal 515aokouev. El Be kai vuels ws ex8pot
evlevéeoffe rotoče tois Aoyous, s wheov tu 5vvagóe ts poveveiv.–Just. Mart. Apol. 1,
page 69.
THE REV. DR. MIDDLETON. 63
stands against you in full force. For such a public appeal to
their bitterest enemies must exclude all reasonable suspicion
of fraud, in the case of the primitive miracles.
6. You tell us, it is objected, Thirdly, “that no suspicion
of fraud can reasonably be entertained against those who
exposed themselves, even to martyrdom, in confirmation of
the truth of what they taught.” (Ibid.)
In order to invalidate this objection, you assert, that some
of the primitive Christians might expose themselves to
martyrdom, out of mere obstinacy; others, from a desire of
glory; others, from a fear of reproach; but the most of all,
from the hope of a higher reward in heaven; especially, as they
believed the end of the world was near, and that the Martyrs
felt no pain in death. “All which topics,” you say, “when
displayed with art, were sufficient to inflame the multitude to
embrace any martyrdom.” (Pages 200–204, 208.)
This appears very plausible in speculation. But fact and
experience will not answer. You are an eloquent man, and
are able to display any topic you please with art enough.
Yet if you was to try, with all that art and eloquence, to
persuade by all these topics, not a whole multitude, but one
simple, credulous ploughman, to go and be shot through the
head; I am afraid, you would scarce prevail with him, after
all, to embrace even that easy martyrdom. And it might be
more difficult still to find a man who, either out of obstinacy,
fear of shame, or desire of glory, would calmly and
deliberately offer himself to be roasted alive in Smithfield.
7. Have you considered, Sir, how the case stood in our
own country, scarce two hundred years ago? Not a
multitude indeed, and yet not a few, of our own countrymen
then expired in the flames. And it was not a general
persuasion among them, that Martyrs feel no pain in death.
That these have feeling, as well as other men, plainly
appeared, in the case of Bishop Ridley, crying out, “I cannot
burn, I cannot burn l” when his lower parts were consumed.
Do you think the fear of shame, or the desire of praise, was
the motive on which these acted? Or have you reason to
believe it was mere obstinacy that hindered them from
accepting deliverance? Sir, since “human nature has always
been the same, so that our experience of what now passes in
our own soul will be the best comment on what is delivered
to us concerning others,” let me entreat you to make the case
64 LETTER. To
your own. You must not say, “I am not one of the ignorant
vulgar: I am a man of sense and learning.” So were many
of them; not inferior even to you, either in natural or
acquired endowments. I ask, then, Would any of these
motives suffice to induce you to burn at a stake? I beseech
you, lay your hand on your heart, and answer between God
and your own soul, what motive could incite you to walk into
a fire, but an hope full of immortality. When you mention
this motive, you speak to the point. And yet even with
regard to this, both you and I should find, did it come to a
trial, that the hope of a fool, or the hope of an hypocrite,
would stand us in no stead. We should find, nothing else
would sustain usin that hour, but a well-grounded confidence of
a better resurrection; nothing less than the “steadfastly looking
up to heaven, and beholding the glory which shall be revealed.”
8. “But heretics,” you say, “have been Martyrs.” I will
answer more particularly, when you specify who and when.
It may suffice to say now, whosoever he be, that, rather than
he will offend God, calmly and deliberately chooses to suffer
death, I cannot lightly speak evil of him.
But Cyprian says, “Some who had suffered tortures for
Christ, yet afterwards fell into gross, open sin.” It may be
so; but it is nothing to the question. It does not prove, in
the least, what you brought it to prove; namely, “that bad
men have endured martyrdom.” Do not evade, Sir, and say,
“Yes, torments are a kind of martyrdom.” True; but not
the martyrdom of which we speak.
9. You salve all at last, by declaring gravely, “It is not
my design to detract in any manner from the just praise of
those primitive Martyrs who sustained the cause of Christ at
the expense of their lives.” (Page 112.) No. Who could
ever suppose it was? Who could imagine it was your design
to detract from the just praise of Justin, Irenaeus, or
Cyprian? You only designed to show what their just praise
was; namely, the praise of pickpockets, of common cheats
and impostors. We understand your meaning, therefore,
when you add, “It is reasonable to believe, that they were
the best sort of Christians, and the chief ornaments of the
Church, in their several ages.” (Page 213.)
10. You conclude: “My view is to show that their martyr
dom does not add any weight to their testimony.” Whether
it does or no, “it gives the strongest proof” (as wou vourself
ThE REV. DR. MIDDLETON. 65
affirm) “of the sincerity of their faith; ” and consequently
proves that “no suspicion of fraud can reasonably be enter
tained against them.” (Ibid.) But this (which you seem to
have quite forgot) was the whole of the objection; and,
consequently, this as well as both the former objections
remain in their full force.
11. “It has been objected,” Fourthly, you say, that you
“destroy the faith and credit of all history.” (Page 114.)
But this objection, you affirm, “when seriously considered,
will appear to have no sense at all in it.” (Page 215.)
That we will try. And one passage, home to the point, is as
good as a thousand. Now, Sir, be pleased to look back. In
your Preface, page 9, I read these words: “The credibility of
facts lies open to the trial of our reason and senses. But the
credibility of witnesses depends on a variety of principles wholly
concealed from us. And though, in many cases, it may reason.
ably be presumed, yet in none can it certainly be known.”
If this be as you assert, (I repeat it again,) then farewell
the credit of all history. Sir, this is not the cant of zealots:
You must not escape so: It is plain, sober reason. If the
credibility of witnesses, of all witnesses, (for you make na
distinction,) depends, as you peremptorily affirm, on a variety
of principles wholly concealed from us, and, consequently,
though it may be presumed in many cases, yet can be certainly
known in none; then it is plain, all history, sacred or profane,
is utterly precarious and uncertain. Then I may indeed
presume, but I cannot certainly know, that Julius Caesar was
killed in the Senate-house; then I cannot certainly know that
there was an Emperor in Germany, called Charles the Fifth;
that Leo the Tenth ever sat in the See of Rome, or Lewis the
Fourteenth on the throne of France. Now, let any man of
common understanding judge, whether this objection has any
sense in it, or no.
12. Under this same head, you fall again upon the case of
witchcraft, and say, “There is not in all history any one mira
culous fact so authentically attested as the existence of witches.
All Christian ” (yea, and all heathen) “nations whatsoever
have consented in the belief of them. Now, to deny the reality
of facts so solemnly attested, and so universally believed, seems
to give the lie to the sense and experience of all Christendom;
to the wisest and best of every nation, and to public monu
ments subsisting to our own times.” (Page 221.)
WOL. X. F
66 LETTER. To
What obliges you, then, to deny it? You answer: “The
incredibility of the thing.” (Page 223.) O Sir, never strain
at the incredibility of this, after you have swallowed an
hundred people talking without tongues!
13. What you aim at in this also is plain, as well as in your
account of the Abbé de Paris. The point of your argument
is, “If you cannot believe these, then you ought not to believe
the Bible: The incredibility of the things related ought to
overrule all testimony whatsoever.”
Your argument, at length, would run thus:
“If things be incredible in themselves, then this incredibi
lity ought to overrule all testimony concerning them.
“But the gospel miracles are incredible in themselves.”
Sir, that proposition I deny. You have not proved it yet.
You have only now and then, as it were by the by, made any
attempt to prove it. And till this is done, you have done
nothing, with all the pother that you have made.
14. You reserve the home stroke for the last : “There is
hardly a miracle said to be wrought in the primitive times, but
what is said to be performed in our days. But all these modern
pretensions we ascribe to their true cause,—the craft of a few,
playing upon the credulity of the many, for private interest.
When, therefore, we read of the same things done by the
ancients, and for the same ends of acquiring wealth, credit, or
power; how can we possibly hesitate to impute them to the
same cause of fraud and imposture?” (Page 230.)
The reason of our hesitation is this: They did not answer
the same ends. The modern Clergy of Rome do acquire credit
and wealth by their pretended miracles. But the ancient
Clergy acquired nothing by their miracles, but to be “afflicted,
destitute, tormented.” The one gain all things thereby; the
others lost all things. And this, we think, makes some differ
ence. “Even unto this present hour,” says one of them,
(writing to those who could easily confute him, if he spoke not
the truth,) “we both hunger and thirst, and are naked, and are
buffeted, and have no certain dwelling-place. Being reviled,
we bless; being persecuted, we suffer it; being defamed, we
entreat. We are become as the filth of the world, as the off
scouring of all things unto this day.” (1 Cor. iv. 11—13.) Now,
Sir, whatever be thought of the others, we apprehend, such
Clergy as these, labouring thus, unto the death, for such credit
and wealth, are not chargeable with fraud and imposture.
THE REV. Dit. MIDDLETON, 67
VI. I have now finished what I had to say with regard to
your book. Yet I think humanity requires me to add a few
words concerning some points frequently touched upon therein,
which perhaps you do not so clearly understand.
We have been long disputing about Christians, about Chris
tianity, and the evidence whereby it is supported. But what
do these terms mean? Who is a Christian indeed? What is
real, genuine Christianity? And what is the surest and most
accessible evidence (if I may so speak) whereby I may know
that it is of God? May the God of the Christians enable me
to speak on these heads, in a manner suitable to the importance
of them
Section I. 1. I would consider, First, Who is a Christian
indeed? What does that term properly imply? It has been
so long abused, I fear, not only to mean nothing at all, but,
what was far worse than nothing, to be a cloak for the vilest
hypocrisy, for the grossest abominations and immoralities of
every kind, that it is high time to rescue it out of the hands of
wretches that are a reproach to human nature; to show deter
minately what manner of man he is, to whom this name of
right belongs.
2. A Christian cannot think of the Author of his being,
without abasing himself before Him; without a deep sense
of the distance between a worm of earth, and Him that
sitteth on the circle of the heavens. In His presence he
sinks into the dust, knowing himself to be less than nothing
in His eye; and being conscious, in a manner words cannot
express, of his own littleness, ignorance, foolishness. So that
he can only cry out, from the fulness of his heart, “O God!
what is man? what am I ?”
3. He has a continual sense of his dependence on the Parent
of good for his being, and all the blessings that attend it. To
Him he refers every natural and every moral endowment; with
all that is commonly ascribed either to fortune, or to the wisdom,
courage, or merit of the possessor. And hence he acquiesces in
whatsoever appears to be His will, not only with patience, but
with thankfulness. He willingly resigns all he is, all he has, to
His wise and gracious disposal. The ruling temper of his heart
is the most absolute submission, and the tenderest gratitude, to
his sovereign Benefactor. And this grateful love creates filial
fear; an awful reverence toward Him, and an earnest care not
to give place to any disposition, not to admit an action, word,
68 LETTER TO
or thought, which might in any degree displease that indulgent
Power to whom he owes his life, breath, and all things.
4. And as he has the strongest affection for the Fountain of
all good, so he has the firmest confidence in Him; a confidence
which neither pleasure nor pain, neither life nor death, can
shake. But yet this, far from creating sloth or indolence,
pushes him on to the most vigorous industry. It causes him
to put forth all his strength, in obeying Him in whom he con
fides. So that he is never faint in his mind, never weary of
doing whatever he believes to be His will. And as he knows
the most acceptable worship of God is to imitate Him he
worships, so he is continually labouring to transcribe into him
self all His imitable perfections; in particular, His justice,
mercy, and truth, so eminently displayed in all His creatures.
5. Above all, remembering that God is love, he is conformed
to the same likeness. He is full of love to his neighbour;
of universal love; not confined to one sect or party; not
restrained to those who agree with him in opinions, or in out
ward modes of worship; or to those who are allied to him by
blood, or recommended by nearness of place. Neither does he
love those only that love him, or that are endeared to him by
intimacy of acquaintance. But his love resembles that of Him
whose mercy is over all His works. It soars above all these
scanty bounds, embracing neighbours and strangers, friends
and enemies; yea, not only the good and gentle, but also the
froward, the evil and unthankful. For he loves every soul
that God has made; every child of man, of whatever place or
nation. And yet this universal benevolence does in nowise
interfere with a peculiar regard for his relations, friends, and
benefactors; afervent love for his country; and the most endeared
affection to all men of integrity, of clear and generous virtue.
6. His love, as to these, so to all mankind, is in itself gene
rous and disinterested; springing from no view of advantage
to himself, from no regard to profit or praise; no, nor even the
pleasure of loving. This is the daughter, not the parent, of his
affection. By experience he knows that social love, if it mean.
the love of our neighbour, is absolutely different from self-love,
even of the most allowable kind; just as different as the objects
at which they point. And yet it is sure, that, if they are under
due regulations, each will give additional force to the other,
till they mix together never to be divided.
7. And this universal, disinterested love is productive of all
THE REV. D.R. MIDDLETON, 69
right affections. It is fruitful of gentleness, tenderness,
sweetness; of humanity, courtesy, and affability. It makes a
Christian rejoice in the virtues of all, and bear a part in their
happiness; at the same time that he sympathizes with their
pains, and compassionates their infirmities. It creates
modesty, condescension, prudence, together with calmness
and evenness of temper. It is the parent of generosity,
openness, and frankness, void of jealousy and suspicion. It
begets candour, and willingness to believe and hope whatever
is kind and friendly of every man; and invincible patience,
never overcome of evil, but overcoming evil with good.
8. The same love constrains him to converse, not only with a
strict regard to truth, but with artless sincerity and genuine
simplicity, as one in whom there is no guile. And, not content
with abstaining from all such expressions as are contrary to
justice or truth, he endeavours to refrain from every unloving
word, either to a present or of an absent person; in all his con
versation aiming at this, either to improve himself in knowledge
or virtue, or to make those with whom he converses some way
wiser, or better, or happier than they were before.
9. The same love is productive of all right actions. It leads
him into an earnest and steady discharge of all social offices,
of whatever is due to relations of every kind; to his friends,
to his country, and to any particular community, whereof he
is a member. It prevents his willingly hurting or grieving
any man. It guides him into an uniform practice of justice
and mercy, equally extensive with the principle whence it
flows. It constrains him to do all possible good, of every
possible kind, to all men; and makes him invariably resolved,
in every circumstance of life, to do that, and that only, to
others, which, supposing he were himself in the same situation,
he would desire they should do to him.
10. And as he is easy to others, so he is easy in himself. He
is free from the painful swellings of pride, from the flames of
anger, from the impetuous gusts of irregular self-will. He is
no longer tortured with envy or malice, or with unreasonable
and hurtful desire. He is no more enslaved to the pleasures of
sense, but has the full power both over his mind and body, in
a continued cheerful course of sobriety, of temperance and
chastity. He knows how to use all things in their place, and
yet is superior to them all. He stands above those low pleasures
of imagination which captivate vulgar minds, whether arising
70 LETTER TO
from what mortals term greatness, or from novelty, or beauty.
All these too he can taste, and still look upward; still aspire to
nobler enjoyments. Neither is he a slave to fame; popular breath
affects not him; he stands steady and collected in himself.
11. And he who seeks no praise, cannot fear dispraise.
Censure gives him no uneasiness, being conscious to himself
that he would not willingly offend, and that he has the appro
bation of the Lord of all. He cannot fear want, knowing in
whose hand is the earth and the fulness thereof, and that it is
impossible for Him to withhold from one that fears Him any
manner of thing that is good. He cannot fear pain, knowing
it will never be sent, unless it be for his real advantage; and
that then his strength will be proportioned to it, as it has
always been in times past. He cannot fear death; being
able to trust Him he loves with his soul as well as his body;
yea, glad to leave the corruptible body in the dust, till it is
raised incorruptible and immortal. So that, in honour or
shame, in abundance or want, in ease or pain, in life or in
death, always, and in all things, he has learned to be content,
to be easy, thankful, happy.
12. He is happy in knowing there is a God, an intelligent
Cause and Lord of all, and that he is not the produce either
of blind chance or inexorable necessity. He is happy in the
full assurance he has that this Creator and End of all things
is a Being of boundless wisdom, of infinite power to execute
all the designs of His wisdom, and of no less infinite goodness
to direct all His power to the advantage of all His creatures.
Nay, even the consideration of his immutable justice, rendering
to all their due, of his unspotted holiness, of his all-sufficiency
in Himself, and of that immense ocean of all perfections
which centre in God from eternity to etermity, is a continual
addition to the happiness of a Christian.
13. A farther addition is made thereto, while, in con
templating even the things that surround him, that thought
strikes warmly upon his heart,
These are thy glorious works, Parent of good 1
while he takes knowledge of the invisible things of God, even
his eternal power and wisdom in the things that are seen, the
heavens, the earth, the fowls of the air, the lilies of the field.
How much more, while, rejoicing in the constant care which
He still takes of the work of his own hand, he breaks out, in
ThE REV. D.R. MIDDLETON. 71
a transport of love and praise, “O Lord our Governor, how
excellent are thy ways in all the earth ! Thou that hast set
thy glory above the heavens !” While he, as it were, sees the
Lord sitting upon His throne, and ruling all things well;
while he observes the general providence of God co-extended
with His whole creation, and surveys all the effects of it in the
heavens and earth, as a well-pleased spectator; while he sees
the wisdom and goodness of His general government descend
ing to every particular, so presiding over the whole universe
as over a single person, so watching over every single person
as if he were the whole universe; how does he exult when he
reviews the various traces of the Almighty goodness, in what
has befallen himself in the several circumstances and changes
of his own life all which he now sees have been allotted to
him, and dealt out in number, weight, and measure. With
what triumph of soul, in surveying either the general or par
ticular providence of God, does he observe every line pointing
out an hereafter, every scene opening into etermity!
14. He is peculiarly and inexpressibly happy, in the
clearest and fullest conviction, “This all-powerful, all-wise,
all-gracious Being, this Governor of all, loves me. This Lover
of my soul is always with me, is never absent, no, not for a
moment. And I love Him: There is none in heaven but
thee, none on earth that I desire beside thee! And he has
given me to resemble Himself; he has stamped His image on
my heart. And I live unto Him; I do only His will; I
glorify him with my body and my spirit. And it will not be
long before I shall die unto Him; I shall die into the arms
of God. And then farewell sin and pain; then it only
remains that I should live with Him for ever.”
15. This is the plain, naked portraiture of a Christian.
But be not prejudiced against him for his name. Forgive his
particularities of opinion, and (what you think) superstitious
modes of worship. These are circumstances but of small
concern, and do not enter into the essence of his character.
Cover them with a veil of love, and look at the substance,—
his tempers, his holiness, his happiness.
Can calm reason conceive either a more amiable or a more
desirable character?
Is it your own? Away with names! Away with opinions !
I care not what you are called. I ask not (it does not deserve
a thought) what opinion you are of, so you are conscious to
72 LETTER. To
yourself, that you are the man whom I have been (however
faintly) describing.
Do not you know, you ought to be such? Is the Governor
of the world well pleased that you are not?
Do you (at least) desire it? I would to God that desire
may penetrate your inmost soul; and that you may have
no rest in your spirit till you are, not only almost, but
altogether, a Christian |
Section II. 1. The Second point to be considered is, What
is real, genuine Christianity? whether we speak of it as a
principle in the soul, or as a scheme or system of doctrine.
Christianity, taken in the latter sense, is that system of
doctrine which describes the character above recited, which
promises, it shall be mine, (provided I will not rest till I
attain,) and which tells me how I may attain it.
2. First. It describes this character in all its parts, and that
in the most lively and affecting manner. The main lines of
this picture are beautifully drawn in many passages of the
Old Testament. These are filled up in the New, retouched
and finished with all the art of God.
The same we have in miniature more than once; particularly
in the thirteenth chapter of the former Epistle to the Cor
inthians, and in that discourse which St. Matthew records as
delivered by our Lord at his entrance upon his public ministry.
3. Secondly. Christianity promises this character shall be
mine, if I will not rest till I attain it. This is promised both
in the Old Testament and the New. Indeed the New is, in
effect, all a promise; seeing every description of the servants
of God mentioned therein has the nature of a command; in
consequence of those general injunctions: “Be ye followers
of me, as I am of Christ:” (1 Cor. xi. 1) “Be ye followers
f them who through faith and patience inherit the promises.”
Teb. vi.12.) And every command has the force of a pro
mise, in virtue of those general promises: “A new heart will
I give you, and I will put my Spirit within you, and cause
you to walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments,
and do them.” (Ezek. xxxvi. 26, 27.) “This is the covenant
that I will make after those days, saith the Lord; I will put
my laws into their minds, and write them in their hearts.”
(Heb. viii. 10.) Accordingly, when it is said, “Thou shalt
love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy
soul, and with all thy mind;” (Matt. xxii. 37;) it is not only a
TIIE REV. DR, MIDDLETON. 73
direction what I shall do, but a promise of what God will do
in me; exactly equivalent with what is written elsewhere:
“The Lord thy God will circumcise thy heart and the heart
of thy seed,” (alluding to the custom then in use,) “to love
the Lord thy God with all thy heart and with all thy soul.”
(Deut. xxx. 6.)
4. This being observed, it will readily appear to every
serious person, who reads the New Testament with that care
which the importance of the subject demands, that every
particular branch of the preceding character is manifestly
promised therein; either explicitly, under the very form of a
promise, or virtually, under that of description or command.
5. Christianity tells me, in the Third place, how I may
attain the promise; namely, by faith.
But what is faith? Not an opinion, no more than it is a
form of words; not any number of opinions put together, be
they ever so true. A string of opinions is no more Christian
faith, than a string of beads is Christian holiness.
It is not an assent to any opinion, or any number of opinions.
A man may assent to three, or three-and-twenty creeds: He
may assent to all the Old and New Testament, (at least, as far
as he understands them,) and yet have no Christian faith at all.
6. The faith by which the promise is attained is represented
by Christianity, as a power wrought by the Almighty in an
immortal spirit, inhabiting a house of clay, to see through that
veil into the world of spirits, into things invisible and eternal;
a power to discern those things which with eyes of flesh and
blood no man hath seen or can see, either by reason of their
nature, which (though they surround us on every side) is not
perceivable by these gross senses; or by reason of their
distance, as being yet afar off in the bosom of eternity.
7. This is Christian faith in the general notion of it. In its
more particular notion, it is a divine evidence or conviction
wrought in the heart, that God is reconciled to me through
his Son; inseparably joined with a confidence in him, as a
gracious, reconciled Father, as for all things, so especially for
all those good things which are invisible and eternal.
To believe (in the Christian sense) is, then, to walk in the
light of eternity; and to have a clear sight of, and confidence in,
the Most High, reconciled to me through the Son of his love.
8. Now, how highly desirable is such a faith, were it only
on its own account | For how little does the wisest of men
74 LETTER. To
know of anything more than he can see with his eyes! What
clouds and darkness cover the whole scene of things invisible
and eternal | What does he know even of himself as to his
invisible part? what of his future manner of existence? How
melancholy an account does the prying, learned philosopher,
(perhaps the wisest and best of all Heathens,) the great, the
venerable Marcus Antoninus, give of these things! What
was the result of all his serious researches, of his high and
deep contemplations? “Either dissipation, (of the soul as
well as the body, into the common, unthinking mass,) or
re-absorption into the universal fire, the unintelligent source of
all things; or some unknown manner of conscious existence,
after the body sinks to rise no more.” One of these three he
supposed must succeed death; but which, he had no light to
determine. Poor Antoninus ! with all his wealth, his honour,
his power ! with all his wisdom and philosophy, .
What points of knowledge did he gain *
That life is sacred all,—and vain :
Sacred, how high, and vain, how low,
[e could not tell; but died to know.
9. “He died to know !” and so must you, unless you are
now a partaker of Christian faith. O consider this ! Nay,
and consider, not only how little you know of the immensity
of the things that are beyond sense and time, but how uncer
tainly do you know even that little ! How faintly glimmering
a light is that you have ! Can you properly be said to know
any of these things? Is that knowledge any more than bare
conjecture? And the reason is plain. You have no senses
suitable to invisible or eternal objects. What desiderata
then, especially to the rational, the reflecting, part of man
kind are these? A more extensive knowledge of things
invisible and eternal; a greater certainty in whatever know
ledge of them we have; and, in order to both, faculties
capable of discerning things invisible.
10. Is it not so? Let impartial reason speak. Does not
every thinking man want a window, not so much in his
neighbour's, as in his own, breast? He wants an opening
there, of whatever kind, that might let in light from eternity.
He is pained to be thus feeling after God so darkly, so
uncertainly; to know so little of God, and indeed so little of
any beside material objects. He is concerned, that he must
see even that little, not directly, but in the dim, sullied glass
*
THE REV. DR, MIDDLETON, 75
of sense; and consequently so imperfectly and obscurely,
that it is all a mere enigma still.
11. Now, these very desiderata faith supplies. It gives a
more extensive knowledge of things invisible, showing what
eye had not seen, nor ear heard, neither could it before enter
into our heart to conceive. And all these it shows in the clear
est light, with the fullest certainty and evidence. For it does not
leave us to receive our notices of them by mere reflection from
the dull glass of sense; but resolves a thousand enigmas of the
highest concern by giving faculties suited to things invisible.
O who would not wish for such a faith, were it only on these
accounts How much more, if by this I may receive the
promise, I may attain all that holiness and happiness !
12. So Christianity tells me; and so I find it, may every
real Christian say. I now am assured that these things are
so: I experience them in my own breast. What Christianity
(considered as a doctrine) promised, is accomplished in my
soul. And Christianity, considered as an inward principle, is
the completion of all those promises. It is holiness and hap
piness, the image of God impressed on a created spirit; a
fountain of peace and love springing up into everlasting life.
Section III. 1. And this I conceive to be the strongest
evidence of the truth of Christianity. I do not undervalue
traditional evidence. Let it have its place and its due honour.
It is highly serviceable in its kind, and in its degree. And
yet I cannot set it on a level with this.
It is generally supposed, that traditional evidence is weak
ened by length of time; as it must necessarily pass through
so many hands, in a continued succession of ages. But no
length of time can possibly affect the strength of this internal
evidence. It is equally strong, equally new, through the
course of seventeen hundred years. It passes now, even as
it has done from the beginning, directly from God into the
believing soul. Do you suppose time will ever, dry up this
stream ? O no ! It shall never be cut off:
Labitur et labetur in omne volubilis avum.*
2. Traditional evidence is of an extremely complicated
nature, necessarily including so many and so various consi
derations, that only men of a strong and clear understanding
can be sensible of its full force. On the contrary, how plain
* It flows on, and will for ever flow.
76 LETTER. To
and simple is this; and how level to the lowest capacity! Is
not this the sum : “One thing I know; I was blind, but
now I see?” An argument so plain, that a peasant, a
woman, a child, may feel all its force.
3. The traditional evidence of Christianity stands, as it
were, a great way off; and therefore, although it speaks loud
and clear, yet makes a less lively impression. It gives us an
account of what was transacted long ago, in far distant times
as well as places. Whereas the inward evidence is intimately
present to all persons, at all times, and in all places. It is
nigh thee, in thy mouth, and in thy heart, if thou believest
in the Lord Jesus Christ. “This,” then, “is the record,”
this is the evidence, emphatically so called, “that God hath
given unto us eternal life; and this life is in his Son.”
4. If then, it were possible (which I conceive it is not) to
shake the traditional evidence of Christianity, still he that
has the internal evidence (and every true believer hath the
witness or evidence in himself) would stand firm and
unshaken. Still he could say to those who were striking at
the external evidence, “Beat on the sack of Anaxagoras.”
But you can no more hurt my evidence of Christianity, than
the tyrant could hurt the spirit of that wise man.
5. I have sometimes been almost inclined to believe, that
the wisdom of God has, in most later ages, permitted the
external evidence of Christianity to be more or less clogged
and incumbered for this very end, that men (of reflection
especially) might not altogether rest there, but be constrained
to look into themselves also, and attend to the light shining
in their hearts.
Nay, it seems (if it may be allowed for us to pry so far into
the reasons of the divine dispensations) that, particularly in
this age, God suffers all kind of objections to be raised
against the traditional evidence of Christianity, that men of
understanding, though unwilling to give it up, yet, at the
same time they defend this evidence, may not rest the whole
strength of their cause thereon, but seek a deeper and firmer
support for it.
6. Without this I cannot but doubt, whether they can long
maintain their cause; whether, if they do not obey the loud
call of God, and lay far more stress than they have hitherto
done on this internal evidence of Christianity, they will not,
one after another, give up the external, and (in heart at least)
THE REW, DR. MIDDLETON. 77
go over to those whom they are now contending with; so that
in a century or two the people of England will be fairly
divided into real Deists and real Christians.
And I apprehend this would be no loss at all, but rather
an advantage to the Christian cause; nay, perhaps it would
be the speediest, yea, the only effectual, way of bringing all
reasonable Deists to be Christians.
7. May I be permitted to speak freely? May I, without
offence, ask of you that are called Christians, what real loss
would you sustain in giving up your present opinion, that the
Christian system is of God? Though you bear the name,
you are not Christians: You have neither Christian faith nor
love. You have no divine evidence of things unseen; you
have not entered into the holiest by the blood of Jesus. You
do not love God with all your heart; neither do you love
your neighbour as yourself. You are neither happy nor holy.
You have not learned in every state therewith to be content;
to rejoice evermore, even in want, pain, death; and in every
thing to give thanks. You are not holy in heart; superior
to pride, to anger, to foolish desires. Neither are you holy
in life; you do not walk as Christ also walked. Does not
the main of your Christianity lie in your opinion, decked
with a few outward observances? For as to morality, even
honest, heathen morality, (O let me utter a melancholy
truth!) many of those whom you style Deists, there is reason
to fear, have far more of it than you.
8. Go on, gentlemen, and prosper. Shame these nominal
Christians out of that poor superstition which they call
Christianity. Reason, rally, laugh them out of their dead,
empty forms, void of spirit, of faith, of love. Convince them,
that such mean pageantry (for such it manifestly is, if there
is nothing in the heart correspondent with the outward
show) is absolutely unworthy, you need not say of God, but
even of any man that is endued with common understanding.
Show them, that while they are endeavouring to please God
thus, they are only beating the air. Know your time; press
on; push your victories, till you have conquered all that
know not God. And then He, whom neither they nor you
know now, shall rise and gird himself with strength, and go forth
in his almighty love, and sweetly conquer you all together.
9. O that the time were come ! How do I long for you to
be partakers of the exceeding great and precious promise !
78 LETTER. To
How am I pained when I hear any of you using those silly
terms, which the men of form have taught you, calling the
mention of the only thing you want, cant 1 the deepest wisdom,
the highest happiness, enthusiasm What ignorance is this !
How extremely despicable would it make you in the eyes of any
but a Christian | But he cannot despise you, who loves you as
his own soul, who is ready to lay down his life for your sake.
10. Perhaps you will say, “But this internal evidence of
Christianity affects only those in whom the promise is fulfilled.
It is no evidence to me.” There is truth in this objection.
It does affect them chiefly, but it does not affect them only.
It cannot, in the nature of things, be so strong an evidence
to others as it is to them. And yet it may bring a degree of
evidence, it may reflect some light on you also.
For, First, you see the beauty and loveliness of
Christianity, when it is rightly understood; and you are sure
there is nothing to be desired in comparison of it.
Secondly. You know the Scripture promises this, and says,
it is attained by faith, and by no other way.
Thirdly. You see clearly how desirable Christian faith is,
even on account of its own intrinsic value.
Fourthly. You are a witness, that the holiness and
happiness above described can be attained no other way.
The more you have laboured after virtue and happiness, the
more convinced you are of this. Thus far then you need not
lean upon other men; thus far you have personal experience.
Fifthly. What reasonable assurance can you have of things
whereof you have not personal experience? Suppose the
question were, Can the blind be restored to sight? This you
have not yourself experienced. How then will you know that
such a thing ever was? Can there be an easier or surer way
than to talk with one or some number of men who were
blind, but are now restored to sight? They cannot be
deceived as to the fact in question; the nature of the thing leaves
no room for this. And if they are honest men, (which you
may learn from other circumstances,) they will not deceive you.
Now, transfer this to the case before us: And those who
were blind, but now see, -those who were sick many years,
but now are healed,—those who were miserable, but now are
happy, -will afford you also a very strong evidence of the truth
of Christianity; as strong as can be in the nature of things,
till you experience it in your own soul: And this, though it
THE REV. DR, MIDIDLETON, 79
be allowed they are but plain men, and, in general, of weak
understanding; nay, though some of them should be mistaken
in other points, and hold opinions which cannot be defended.
11. All this may be allowed concerning the primitive
Fathers', I mean particularly Clemens Romanus, Ignatius,
Polycarp, Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, Origen, Clemens
Alexandrinus, Cyprian; to whom I would add Macarius
and Ephraim Syrus.
I allow that some of these had not strong natural sense, that
few of them had much learning, and none the assistances which
our age enjoys in some respects above all that went before.
Hence I doubt not but whoever will be at the pains of
reading over their writings for that poor end, will find many
mistakes, many weak suppositions, and many ill-drawn
conclusions.
12. And yet I exceedingly reverence them, as well as their
writings, and esteem them very highly in love. I reverence
them, because they were Christians, such Christians as are
above described. And I reverence their writings, because
they describe true, genuine Christianity, and direct us to the
strongest evidence of the Christian doctrine.
Indeed, in addressing the Heathens of those times, they
intermix other arguments; particularly, that drawn from the
numerous miracles which were then performed in the
Church; which they needed only to open their eyes and see
daily wrought in the face of the sun.
But still they never relinquish this: “What the Scripture
promises, I enjoy. Come and see what Christianity has done
here; and acknowledge it is of God.”
I reverence these ancient Christians (with all their failings)
the more, because I see so few Christians now; because I
read so little in the writings of later times, and hear so little,
of genuine Christianity; and because most of the modern
Christians, (so called,) not content with being wholly
ignorant of it, are deeply prejudiced against it, calling it
enthusiasm, and I know not what.
That the God of power and love may make both them, and
you, and me, such Christians as those Fathers were, is the
earnest prayer of, Reverend Sir,
Your real friend and servant.
January 24, 1748-9.
A.
LETTER TO A ROMAN CATHOLIC.
1. YoU have heard ten thousand stories of us who are
commonly called Protestants, of which if you believe only
one in a thousand, you must think very hardly of us. But
this is quite contrary to our Lord's rule, “Judge not, that ye
be not judged;” and has many ill consequences; particularly
this,—it inclines us to think as hardly of you. Hence we are
on both sides less willing to help one another, and more
ready to hurt each other. Hence brotherly love is utterly
destroyed; and each side, looking on the other as monsters,
gives way to anger, hatred, malice, to every unkind affection;
which have frequently broke out in such inhuman barbarities
as are scarce named among the Heathens.
2. Now, can nothing be done, even allowing us on both
sides to retain our own opinions, for the softening our hearts
towards each other, the giving a check to this flood of
unkindness, and restoring at least some small degree of love
among our neighbours and countrymen? Do not you wish
for this? Are you not fully convinced, that malice, hatred,
revenge, bitterness, whether in us or in you, in our hearts or
yours, are an abomination to the Lord? Be our opinions
right, or be they wrong, these tempers are undeniably
wrong. They are the broad road that leads to destruction,
to the methermost hell.
3. I do not suppose all the bitterness is on your side. I
know there is too much on our side also; so much, that I
fear many Protestants (so called) will be angry at me too, for
writing to you in this manner; and will say, “It is showing
you too much favour; you deserve no such treatment at our
hands.”
4. But I think you do. I think you deserve the tenderest
regard I can show, were it only because the same God hath
raised you and me from the dust of the earth, and has made
us both capable of loving and enjoying him to eternity; were it
LETTER TO A ROMAN CATHOLIC. 81
only because the Son of God has bought you and me with
his own blood. How much more, if you are a person fearing
God, (as without question many of you are,) and studying to
have a conscience void of offence towards God and towards
man?
5. I shall therefore endeavour, as mildly and inoffensively
as I can, to remove in some measure the ground of your
unkindness, by plainly declaring what our belief and what
our practice is; that you may see, we are not altogether such
monsters as perhaps you imagined us to be.
A true Protestant may express his belief in these or the
like words:—
6. As I am assured that there is an infinite and independent
being, and that it is impossible there should be more than one;
so I believe, that this One God is the Father of all things,
especially of angels and men; that he is in a peculiar manner
the Father of those whom he regenerates by his Spirit, whom
he adopts in his Son, as co-heirs with him, and crowns with
an eternal inheritance; but in a still higher sense the Father
of his only Son, whom he hath begotten from eternity.
I believe this Father of all, not only to be able to do what
soever pleaseth him, but also to have an eternal right of
making what and when and how he pleaseth, and of possessing
and disposing of all that he has made; and that he of his own
goodness created heaven and earth, and all that is therein.
7. I believe that Jesus of Nazareth was the Saviour of the
world, the Messiah so long foretold; that, being anointed
with the Holy Ghost, he was a Prophet, revealing to us the
whole will of God; that he was a Priest, who gave himself a
sacrifice for sin, and still makes intercession for transgressors;
that he is a King, who has all power in heaven and in earth,
and will reign till he has subdued all things to himself.
I believe he is the proper, natural Son of God, God of
God, very God of very God; and that he is the Lord of all,
baving absolute, supreme, universal dominion over all things;
but more peculiarly our Lord, who believe in him, both by
conquest, purchase, and voluntary obligation.
I believe that he was made man, joining the human nature
with the divine in one person; being conceived by the
singular operation of the Holy Ghost, and born of the blessed
Virgin Mary, who, as well after as before she brought him
forth, continued a pure and unspotted virgin.
WOL. X.
82 LETTER. To
I believe he suffered inexpressible pains both of body and
soul, and at last death, even the death of the cross, at the time
that Pontius Pilate governed Judea, under the Roman Emperor;
that his body was then laid in the grave, and his soul went to
the place of separate spirits; that the third day he rose again
from the dead; that he ascended into heaven; where he
remains in the midst of the throne of God, in the highest power
and glory, as Mediator till the end of the world, as God to
all eternity; that, in the end, he will come down from heaven,
to judge every man according to his works; both those who
shall be then alive, and all who have died before that day.
8. I believe the infinite and eternal Spirit of God, equal
with the Father and the Son, to be not only perfectly holy in
himself, but the immediate cause of all holiness in us;
enlightening our understandings, rectifying our wills and
affections, renewing our natures, uniting our persons to
Christ, assuring us of the adoption of sons, leading us in our
actions; purifying and sanctifying our souls and bodies, to a
full and eternal enjoyment of God.
9. I believe that Christ by his Apostles gathered unto him
self a Church, to which he has continually added such as
shall be saved; that this catholic, that is, universal, Church,
extending to all nations and all ages, is holy in all its mem
bers, who have fellowship with God the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost; that they have fellowship with the holy angels,
who constantly minister to these heirs of salvation; and with
all the living members of Christ on earth, as well as all who
are departed in his faith and fear.
10. I believe Godforgives all the sins of them that truly repent
and unfeignedly believe his holy gospel; and that, at the last
day, all men shall rise again, every one with his own body.
I believe, that as the unjust shall, after their resurrection,
be tormented in hell for ever, so the just shall enjoy
inconceivable happiness in the presence of God to all eternity.
ll. Now, is there anything wrong in this? Is there any
one point which you do not believe as well as we?
But you think we ought to believe more. We will not
now enter into the dispute. Only let me ask, If a man
sincerely believes thus much, and practises accordingly, can
any one possibly persuade you to think that such a man shall
perish everlastingly?
12. “But does he practise accordingly?” If he does not,
A ROMAN CATHOLIC. 83
we grant all his faith will not save him. And this leads me
to show you, in few and plain words, what the practice of a
true Protestant is.
I say, a true Protestant; for I disclaim all common
swearers, Sabbath-breakers, drunkards; all whoremongers,
liars, cheats, extortioners; in a word, all that live in open
sin. These are no Protestants; they are no Christians at
all. Give them their own name; they are open Heathens.
They are the curse of the nation, the bane of society, the
shame of mankind, the scum of the earth.
13. A true Protestant believes in God, has a full confidence
in his mercy, fears him with a filial fear, and loves him with all
his soul. He worships God in spirit and in truth, in everything
gives him thanks; calls upon him with his heart as well as
his lips, at all times and in all places; honours his holy name
and his word, and serves him truly all the days of his life.
Now, do not you yourself approve of this? Is there any
one point you can condemn? Do not you practise as well as
approve of it? Can you ever be happy if you do not? Can
you ever expect true peace in this, or glory in the world to
come, if you do not believe in God through Christ? if you
do not thus fear and love God? My dear friend, consider,
I am not persuading you to leave or change your religion, but
to follow after that fear and love of God without which all reli
gion is vain. I say not a word to you about your opinions or
outward manner of worship. But I say, all worship is an abomi
nation to the Lord, unless you worship him in spirit and in
truth; with your heart, as well as your lips; with your spirit,
and with your understanding also. Be your form of worship
what it will, but in everything give him thanks; else it is all
but lost labour. Use whatever outward observances you please,
but put your whole trust in him; but honour his holy name
and his word, and serve him truly all the days of your life.
14. Again: A true Protestant loves his neighbour, that is,
every man, friend or enemy, good or bad, as himself, as he
loves his own soul, as Christ loved us. And as Christ laid
down his life for us, so is he ready to lay down his life for his
brethren. He shows this love, by doing to all men, in all
points, as he would they should do unto him. He loves,
honours, and obeys his father and mother, and helps them to
the uttermost of his power. He honours and obeys the King,
and all that are put in authority under him. He cheerfully
G 2 "
84 LETTER. To
submits to all his Governors, Teachers, spiritual Pastors, and
Masters. He behaves lowly and reverently to all his betters.
He hurts nobody, by word or deed. He is true and just in
all his dealings. He bears no malice or hatred in his heart.
He abstains from all evil speaking, lying and slandering;
neither is guile found in his mouth. Knowing his body to
be the temple of the Holy Ghost, he keeps it in sobriety,
temperance, and chastity. He does not desire other men’s
goods; but is content with that he hath; labours to get his
own living, and to do the whole will of God in that state of
life unto which it has pleased God to call him.
15. Have you anything to reprove in this? Are you not
herein even as he? If not, (tell the truth,) are you not con
demned both by God and your own conscience? Can you
fall short of any one point hereof without falling short of
being a Christian 7
Come, my brother, and let us reason together. Are you
right if you only love your friend and hate your enemy? Do
not even the Heathens and publicans so ? You are called
to love your enemies; to bless them that curse you, and to
pray for them that despitefully use you and persecute you.
But are you not disobedient to the heavenly calling? Does
your tender love to all men, not only the good, but also the
evil and unthankful, approve you the child of your Father
which is in heaven? Otherwise, whatever you believe and
whatever you practise, you are of your father the devil. Are
you ready to lay down your life for your brethren? And do
you do unto all as you would they should do unto you? If
not, do not deceive your own soul: You are but a Heathen
still. Do you love, honour, and obey your father and mother,
and help them to the utmost of your power? Do you honour
and obey all in authority? all your Governors, spiritual
Pastors, and Masters? Do you behave lowly and reverently
to all your betters? Do you hurt nobody, by word or deed?
Are you true and just in all your dealings? Do you take
care to pay whatever you owe ? Do you feel no malice, or
envy, or revenge, no hatred or bitterness to any man? If
you do, it is plain you are not of God: For all these are the
tempers of the devil. Do you speak the truth from your
heart to all men, and that in tenderness and love? Are you
“an Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile?” Do you keep
your body in sobriety, temperance, and chastity, as knowing
A ROMAN CATHOLIC. 85
it is the temple of the Holy Ghost, and that, if any man defile
the temple of God, him will God destroy? Have you learned,
in every state wherein you are, therewith to be content? Do
you labour to get your own living, abhorring idleness as you
abhor hell-fire? The devil tempts other men; but an idle man
tempts the devil. An idle man’s brain is the devil’s shop,
where he is continually working mischief. Are you not sloth
ful in business? Whatever your hand finds to do, do you do
it with your might? And do you do all as unto the Lord,
as a sacrifice unto God, acceptable in Christ Jesus?
This, and this alone, is the old religion. This is true, primi
tive Christianity. O when shall it spread over all the earth !
When shall it be found both in us and you? Without waiting
for others, let each of us, by the grace of God, amend one.
16. Are we not thus far agreed? Let us thank God for
this, and receive it as a fresh token of his love. But if God
still loveth us, we ought also to love one another. We ought,
without this endless jangling about opinions, to provoke one
another to love and to good works. Let the points wherein
we differ stand aside; here are enough wherein we agree,
enough to be the ground of every Christian temper, and of
every Christian action.
Obrethren, let us not still fall out by the way! I hope to see
you in heaven. And if I practise the religion above described,
you dare not say I shall go to hell. You cannot think so. None
can persuade you to it. Your own conscience tells you the con
trary. Then if we cannot as yet think alike in all things, at
least we may love alike. Herein we cannot possibly do amiss.
For of one point none can doubt a moment,-“God is love;
and he that dwelleth in love, dwelleth in God, and God in him.”
17. In the name, then, and in the strength of God, let us
resolve, First, not to hurt one another; to do nothing unkind
or unfriendly to each other, nothing which we would not have
done to ourselves: Rather let us endeavour after every instance
of a kind, friendly, and Christian behaviour towards each other.
Let us resolve, Secondly, God being our helper, to speak
nothing harsh or unkind of each other. The sure way to
avoid this, is to say all the good we can, both of and to one
another: In all our conversation, either with or concerning
each other, to use only the language of love; to speak with
all softness and tenderness; with the most endearing expres
sion which is consistent with truth and sincerity.
86 RoMAN CATECHISM, AND REPLY.
Let us, Thirdly, resolve to harbour no unkind thought, no
unfriendly temper, towards each other. Let us lay the axe to
the root of the tree; let us examine all that rises in our heart,
and suffer no disposition there which is contrary to tender
affection. Then shall we easily refrain from unkind actions
and words, when the very root of bitterness is cut up.
Let us, Fourthly, endeavour to help each other on in what
ever we are agreed leads to the kingdom. So far as we can,
let us always rejoice to strengthen each other's hands in
God. Above all, let us each take heed to himself, (since each
must give an account of himself to God,) that he fall not
short of the religion of love; that he be not condemned in
that he himself approveth. Olet you and I (whatever others
do) press on to the prize of our high calling! that, being
justified by faith, we may have peace with God through our
Lord Jesus Christ; that we may rejoice in God through Jesus
Christ, by whom we have received the atonement; that the
love of God may be shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy
Ghost which is given unto us. Let us count all things but
loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Jesus Christ our
Lord; being ready for him to suffer the loss of all things, and
counting them but dung, that we may win Christ.
I am
Your affectionate servant, for Christ's sake.
DUBLIN, July 18, 1749.
A ROMAN CATECHISM,
FAITHFULLY DRAWN OUT OF THE ALLOWED WRITINGS
OF THE CHURCH OF ROME.
WITH A REPLY THERETO.
PREFA CE.
IT has been a frequent complaint among some of the Romish
Church, that the Protestants have misrepresented the doctrine
of their Church: On the other side, the Protestants accuse
ROMAN CATECHISM, AND REPLY. 87
the writers in that Church, of concealing, disguising, and
palliating their doctrines. The latter justify their charge by
producing such authors as have in several ages not only
taught that doctrine, but taught it as the doctrine of their
Church; the former deny the charge, by appealing from
particular authors to an higher authority, to Councils and
public acts and decrees, to Missals, Breviaries, and Catechisms.
Now, though those Protestants are not to be blamed, when
the authors they quote have been first licensed and approved
in that Church, and were never afterward condemned by it;
yet in composing this Catechism, to avoid contention as much
as I can, I have generally observed their directions, and have
seldom made use of particular authors, but when it is for the
explication of a doctrine that is not sufficiently explained, or
for confirmation of a doctrine generally received. I am very
confident that the quotations throughout are true, having again
and again examined them; and I have been as careful as I
could not to mistake the sense of them; that I might rightly
understand and truly represent the doctrine which I profess
to censure; for without a faithful and impartial examination
of an error, there can be no solid confutation of it.
SECTION I.
oF THE CHURCH, AND RULE of FAITH.
QUESTION 1. WHAT is the Church of Rome?
ANswer. The Church of Rome is that Society of Christians
which professes it necessary to salvation to be subject to the
Pope of Rome,” as the alone visible head of the Church.t
REPLY. Christ is the Head, from whom the whole body is
fitly joined together. And the holding to that Head (Coloss.
ii. 19) is the one great note of the Church, given by St. Austin.
* Dicimus, definimus, pronunciamus absolute necessarium ad salutem, omni
humanae creature subesse Romano Pontifici. Extravag. c. Unam sanctam de
Majoritate et Obedientia.
“We say, define, and pronounce, that it is absolutely necessary to salvation,
for every man to be subject to the Pope of Rome.”
+ Bellarm. De Eccles. milit. l. 3, c. 2, sec. Nostra autem sententia; et cap. 5,
sec. Respondeo neminem
88 ROMAN CATECHISM, AND REPLY.
(De Unit. Eccles. c. 3, 4.) But there is neither in Scripture
nor antiquity any evidence for a visible head, and much less
for the visible head, the Pope; and, least of all, that it is
necessary to salvation to be subject to him.
If it is necessary to salvation to be subject to him, it is
necessary to know who is the Pope; but that the world hath
often been divided about, when there were sometimes three,
and for about forty years together two, Popes.—Wide Theod.
Niem. de Schism. Univers.
Q. 2. How comes subjection to the Pope to be necessary to
salvation, and an essential note of the Church?
A. Because the Pope is Christ's Vicar, St. Peter's successor,
(Concil. Trid. Sess. 6; Decret. de Reform. cap. 1; Bulla Pii
IV, sup. Form. Juram.,) and hath the supreme power on
earth over the whole Church. (Con. Trid. Sess. 14, c. 7.)
“The Church is called one, as it has one invisible Head,—
Christ; and one visible, who doth possess the chair at Rome,
as the lawful successor of St. Peter, prince of the Apostles.”
(Catech. Rom. par. 1, c. 10, n. 11.)
REPLY. If Christ gave no such power to St. Peter, or the
Pope be not St. Peter's successor, then the Pope has no
pretence to this power. Now, we read that “Christ gave
some Apostles, and some Prophets, for the work of the ministry
and the edifying the body.” (Eph. iv. 11, 12.) But that he
gave one Apostle pre-eminence above the rest, much less
absolute power over them, we read not. This power they
were forbidden to attempt or desire; (Matt. xx. 26;) and St.
Paul was so far from acknowledging it, that he challenged an
equality with the rest of the Apostles, (Gal. i. 15, 17,) and,
upon occasion, withstood St. Peter. (Gal. ii. 11.)
To this we may add the judgment of St. Cyprian: “The
other Apostles are the same St. Peter was, endowed with
an equal fellowship of honour and power.” (Epist. de Unit.
Eccles.)
Q. 3. What authority doth the Church of Rome challenge?
A. She declares that she is the mother and mistress of all
Churches; (Concil. Later. 4, can. 2; Concil. Trid. Sess. 7; De
Bapt. can. 3, &c.;) and that to believe her so to be is necessary
to salvation. (Bulla Pii IV, super. Form. Jur.) Pope Innocent
III, thus decreed: “As God is called universal Lord, because
ROMAN CATECHISM, AND REPLY. 89
all things are under his dominion; so the Church of Rome is
called Catholic, or universal, because all Churches are subject
unto her.” (Apud Baron. Annal. 1199.)
REPLY. As it was foretold, so it was fulfilled: “Out of
Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from
Jerusalem.” (Isaiah ii. 3.) There the Church began; and
therefore, in the Synodical Epistle of the Second General
Council of Constantinople, Jerusalem is called “the mother
of all Churches.” (Baron. A. D. 382, p. 461.)
If she is the mistress because she is the mother, (as Pope
Innocent I. would have it, Epist. 1, Concil., tom. 4, p. 5)
then Jerusalem was the mistress. If the mistress because
she was once the imperial city, then Constantinople was so
likewise; and accordingly it was decreed in the Fourth
General Council, that of Chalcedon, can. 28, “That the
Church of Constantinople should have equal privileges with
that of Rome, because she is the imperial seat.”
And if she claims this sovereign authority upon any other
reason, she never had, nor can ever prove, a right to it.
This is confirmed by Pope Pius II., (when a Cardinal) who
saith, that “before the time of the Nicene Council, little regard
was had to the Church of Rome.” (Epist. 288.)
Q. 4. What use doth she make of this authority?
A. She requires all persons, upon her sole authority, to
receive and believe the doctrines she proposes to be received
and believed,” and without the belief of which she declares
there is no salvation.f
REPLY. “The gospel which was preached of me, is not after
man; for I neither received it of man, neither was I taught
it, but by the revelation of Jesus Christ.” (Gal. i. 11, 12.)
“Though we, or an angel from heaven, preach any other
gospel unto you, than that which we have preached, let him
be accursed.” (Verses 8, 9.)
The Church of Rome cannot avoid St. Paul’s anathema,
* Sacrosancta synodus omnibus Christi fidelibus interdicit, ne posthac de sanc
tissimá Eucharistiá aliter credere, docere, aut praedicare audeant, quam ut est
hoc praesenti decreto explicatum, atque definitum.–Concil. Trid. Sess. 13, Decret.
de Euchar. So again, Sess. 25, Decret. de Purgatorio. And there are above a hun
dred anathemas in that Council in point of doctrine against such as do not so believe.
+ Hanc veram catholicam fidem, extra quam nemo salvus esse potest: That is,
“This is the true Catholic faith, without which no man can be saved.”—Bulla
Pii IV., super Form. Juram.
/
90 RoMAN CATECHISM, AND REPLY.
when she requires to bow down before an image, which the
Scripture forbids; and forbids to read the Scripture, which it
requires.
And without doubt the text of the Apostle holds as much
against any other, as against himself or an angel from heaven.
Q. 5. Doth not the Church of Rome acknowledge the holy
Scripture to be a sufficient rule for faith and manners?
A. No: For there are some doctrines proposed by that
Church as matters of faith, and some things required as
necessary duty, which are by many learned men among
themselves confessed not to be contained in Scripture.
REPLY. We read in Scripture of “the faith once delivered
to the saints;” (Jude 3;) and “all” or the whole “Scrip
ture is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for
instruction in righteousness; that the man of God may be
perfect, throughly furnished unto all good works.” (2 Tim.
iii. 16, 17.)
The Scripture, therefore, is a rule sufficient in itself, and
was by men divinely inspired at once delivered to the world;
and so neither needs, nor is capable of, any further addition.
So Tertullian: “Let Hermogenes show that this thing is
written. If it be not written, let him fear the woe pronounced
against them that add to, or take from, Scripture.” (Contra
Hermog., c. 22.)
Q. 6. What doctrines of faith and matters of practice are
thus acknowledged not to be in Scripture?
A. The doctrines of transubstantiation, (Scotus in 4 Sent.
Dist. 11, q.3, et Yribarn in Scot.,) of the seven sacraments,
(Bellarm. l. 2, de Effectu Sacram., c. 25, sec. Secunda pro
batio, ) of purgatory, (Roffens. contra Luther., art. 18,) and
the practice of half-communion, (Concil. Constan., Sess. 13,
Cassander, art. 22,) worshipping of saints and images, (Bel
larm. de Cult. Sanct, l. 3, c. 9, sec. Praeterea. Cassand. Con
sult, art. 21, sec. 4) indulgences, (Polyd. Virg. de Invent.,
l. 8, c. 1) and service in an unknown tongue. (Bellarm. de
Verb. Dei, l. 2, c. 26.)
REPLY. On the contrary, St. Augustine writes, “If any
one concerning Christ and his Church, or concerning any
other things which belong to faith or life, I will not say if we,
but (which St. Paul hath added) if an angel from heaven,
ROMAN CATECHISM, AND REPLY. 91
preach unto you besides what ye have received in the Law
and Evangelical Writings, let him be accursed.” (Contr.
Petil, l. 3, c. 6.) For as all faith is founded upon divine
authority, so there is now no divine authority but the
Scriptures; and, therefore, no one can make that to be of
divine authority which is not contained in them. And if
transubstantiation and purgatory, &c., are not delivered in
Scripture, they cannot be doctrines of faith.
Q. 7. What doth the Church of Rome propound to herself
as an entire rule of faith?
A. Scripture with tradition; and she requires that the
traditions be received and reverenced with the like pious
regard and veneration as the Scriptures; and whosoever
knowingly contemns them, is declared by her to be accursed.
(Concil. Trid. Sess. 4; Decret. de Can. Script.)
REPLY. “In vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines
the commandments of men;” (Matt. xv. 9;) forbidding that
as unlawful which God hath not forbidden, and requiring
that as necessary duty which God hath not required.
So St. Hierom: “The sword of God,” his word, “doth
smite those other things, which they find and hold of their
own accord, as by apostolical tradition, without the authority
and testimony of Scripture.” (In Cap. 1, Aggaei.)
Q. 8. What do they understand by traditions?
A. Such things belonging to faith and manners as were
dictated by Christ, or the Holy Ghost in the Apostles, and
have been preserved by a continual succession in the Catholic
Church, from hand to hand, without writing. (Concil. Trid.
ibid.)
REPLY. But St. Cyril affirms, “It behoveth us not to
deliver, no, not so much as the least thing of the holy mysteries
of faith, without the holy Scripture. That is the security of
our faith, not which is from our own inventions, but from
the demonstration of the holy Scriptures.” (Catechis. 5.)
Q. 9. What are those traditions which they profess to have
received from Christ and his Apostles?
A. The offering the sacrifice of the mass for the souls in
purgatory, (Conc. Trid. Sess. 22, c. 2) the mystical bene
dictions, incensings, garments, and many other things of the
92 ROMAN CATECHISM, AND REPLY.
like kind, (c. 5) salt, spittle, exorcisms, and wax candles used
in baptism, &c., (Catech. Rom., par. 2, c. 2, n. 59, 65, &c.,)
the Priests shaving the head after the manner of a crown.
(Ibid. c. 7, n. 14.)
REPLY. “Laying aside the commandment of God, ye hold
the tradition of men.” (Mark vii. 8.)
“It is necessary even for novices to learn the Scriptures,
that the mind may be well confirmed in piety, and that they
may not be accustomed to human traditions.” (St. Basil in
Reg. Brev. Reg. 95.)
The Church of Rome hath no more to show for their holy
water, and incensings, and salt, and spittle, &c., than the
Pharisees for their traditions; and since they no less impose
them as divine than the other, they are alike guilty with them.
Q. 10. Doth the Church of Rome agree with other Churches
in the number of canonical books of Scripture?
A. No: For she hath added to the canonical books of the
Old Testament, Esdras, Tobit, Judith, Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus,
Baruch, the two Books of Maccabees,” and a new part of
Esther and Daniel; which whole Books, with all their parts,f
whosoever rejects as not canonical, is accursed. (Concil.
Trident. Sess. 4, Decret. de Scriptur.)
REPLY. These apocryphal books were wrote after prophecy
and divine inspiration ceased, and so were not received by
the Jewish Church, (to whom “were committed the oracles
of God,” Rom. iii. 2) nor by the Christian Church, as the
Sixtieth Canon of the Council of Laodicea shows, where there
is a catalogue of the canonical Books, without any mention of
these.
“As therefore the Church doth read Tobias, Judith, and
the Books of the Maccabees, but doth not receive them into
the canonical Scriptures; so it doth read the two volumes of
Wisdom and Ecclesiasticus for the edification of the people,
not to establish the authority of ecclesiastical principles.”
St. Jerome. (In Prologo Proverb.)—See Bellarm. de Verbo,
l. 1, c. 10 init.
* These books are so sacred, as that they are of infallible truth.-Bellarm. De
Verbo, l. 1, c. 10, sec. Ecclesia vera.
+ Wherefore doth the Council add, “with all their parts; ” unless that all
should understand those parts also, about which there was some time a dispute,
to belong to the sacred canon of the Bible?—Ibid. c. 7, sec. Denique.
ROMAN CATECHISM, AND REPLY. 93
Q. 11, Are the people of the Church of Rome permitted
to read the Scripture in a tongue vulgarly known?
A. No; they were for a time permitted to read it, under
the caution of a license, where it could be obtained; (Reg.
Ind. Libr. Prohib. Reg. 4;) but since they are forbid it, or to
have so much as any summary or historical compendium of it
in their own tongue. (Index Libr. Prohib. Auctor. Sixti V.,
et Clem. VIII. Observat. circa 4 Regulam.)
REPLY. Under the Law, the people had the Scriptures in
a tongue vulgarly known; and they were required to read
the law, and to be conversant in it: “These words, which I
command thee this day, shall be in thine heart,” &c.; (Deut.
vi. 6;) and accordingly our Saviour sends them thither:
“Search the Scriptures.” (John v. 39.) So St. Paul requires
that his “Epistle be read to all the brethren;” (1 Thess. v.
27;) and, if so, it was wrote in a language they understood.
And so it was in the primitive Church; therefore St.
Chrysostom exhorts his hearers, though secular men, to
provide themselves Bibles, the medicines of their souls, to be
their perpetual instructers. (Comment. in Coloss. iii. 16.)
Q. 12. For what reason is the Scripture thus prohibited
among them?
A. “Because,” say they, “if it be permitted to be read
every where, without difference, there would more prejudice
than profit proceed from it.” (Reg. Ind. Libr. Prohib. Reg. 4.)
REPLY. In the Apostles’ times there were some that
“wrested the Scriptures to their own destruction;” and yet
the Apostle thought of no other expedient than to give the
Christians a caution, that they were “not also led away with
the error of the wicked.” (2 Pet. iii. 16, 17.) The way to
prevent this, therefore, is, not to keep the Scriptures from
the people, which “were written for our learning,” (Rom.
xv. 4,) but to exhort them to a diligent perusal of them: “Ye
err, not knowing the Scriptures.” (Matt. xxii. 29.)
“The sheep should not cast away their skin, because wolves
sometimes hide themselves under it.” (St. Austin de Serm.
Dom. in Monte.)
Q. 13. Since the Scripture may be misunderstood, have
they no judge to determine the sense of it?
A. They say, “It belongs to the Church” (of Rome) “to
94 RoMAN CATECHISM, AND REPLY.
judge of the sense of Scripture, and no one may presume to
interpret the Scripture contrary to the sense which Mother
Church hath held and doth hold.” (Concil. Trid. Sess. 4.
Decret. de Edit. et Usu Script.)
It cannot be called the Church of God where the legitimate
successor of St. Peter in the Roman Chair, and the undoubted
vicar of Christ, doth not preside: What the Church doth
teach is the express word of God; and what is taught against the
sense and consent of the Church, is the express word of the
devil. (Cardinal Hosius de expresso Dei verbo, p. 642, 643.)
REPLY. While the Apostles were alive, the Churches of
Christ, in matters of dispute, applied themselves to them, as
in the point of circumcision; (Acts xv.2;) but since they of
the Church of Rome can never prove the like infallibility in
their Church, nor direct us where it is, we think ourselves as
well in our Church as they can be in theirs; and that as long
as we have the Scripture, the Church is to be referred to the
Scripture, and not the Scripture to the Church; and that, as
the Scripture is the best expounder of itself, so the best way
to know whether anything be of divine authority, is to apply
ourselves to the Scripture.
“If I would have the Church demonstrated, it is not by
human teachings, but by the divine oracles.” (St. Aug. de
Unit. Eccles. cap. 3.)
“The way for understanding the Scriptures, is to demon
strate out of themselves, concerning themselves.” (Clem.
Alex. Strom. l. 7, p. 757.)
SECTION II.
OF REPENTANCE AND OBEDIENCE.
QUESTION 14. WHAT doth the Church of Rome teach
concerning repentance?
ANswer (1.) It teacheth that contrition, which is a sorrow
for sin past, and a purpose of not committing it for the future,
though perfected with charity, is not sufficient to reconcile a
person to God without penance, or confession to a Priest
either in act or desire. (Concil. Trid. Sess. 14, c. 4. Catech.
Rom. Pars 2, de Sacrament. Paenit. n. 38.)
A. (2.) She teacheth that attrition, or imperfect contrition,
ROMAN CATECHISM, AND REPLY. 95
proceeding merely from the fear of hell, is equivalent to
contrition, by virtue of confession; and that attrition doth
dispose to receive the grace of the sacrament of penance, and
leads to justification. (Sess. 14, cap. 4. Bellarm. de Paenit. l. 2,
c. 18, sec. Sed sciendum est.)—See Question 77.
REPLY. Contrition is but another word for repentance; and
repentance is a qualification for pardon and reconciliation:
“A broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou wilt not
despise.” (Psalm li. 17.) “Repent, and be converted, that
your sins may be blotted out.” (Acts iii. 19.) The same
texts which make contrition sufficient, without confession to
the Priest, make attrition insufficient without there be
contrition. And as the former doctrine of the insufficiency
of contrition without confession, makes that necessary which
God hath not made necessary; so this latter of the sufficiency
of attrition upon confession to the Priest without contrition,
makes that unnecessary which God hath made necessary.
Q. 15. What is the judgment of the Church of Rome as
to good works?
A. The Church of Rome doth affirm that the good works
of justified persons do truly deserve eternal life; (Concil.
Trid. Sess. 6, c. 16;) and if any one say that such works do
not truly deserve an increase of grace here, and eternal life
hereafter, let him be accursed. (Ibid. Can. 32.)
“Our good works do merit eternal life, not only by virtue
of God’s covenant and acceptation, but also by reason of the
work itself.” (Bellarm. de Justif. l. 5, c. 17.)
REPLY. Truly to deserve is to make 'our debtor: “To
him that worketh ” (that is, that meriteth) “is the reward
not reckoned of grace, but of debt.” (Rom. iv. 4.) “But
can a man be profitable to God?” (Job xxii. 2.) Our
Saviour teaches us otherwise: “When ye shall have done all
those things which are commanded you, say, We are
unprofitable servants; we have done that which was our duty
to do.” (Luke xvii. 10.)
A command to do it, and grace to obey that command,
and a “far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory,” as a
reward, (2 Cor. iv. 17,) will shame the pretence of real merit,
and turn the anathema upon themselves. And they may as
soon reconcile light and darkness, as the grace of God and
merit of Christ to this doctrine.
96 RoMAN CATECHISM, AND REPLY.
Q. 16. But is there no allowance for such as have not good
works of their own sufficient to merit for themselves?
A. Yes; there are indulgences to be obtained, by which
persons may be discharged from the punishment of sin here
and in purgatory; and if any affirm these indulgences to be
useless, or that the Church hath no power to grant them, he
is accursed. (Concil. Trid. Sess. 25, Decret. de Indulg.)
The Popes and Prelates of the Church are judges
appointed by God to remit faults and punishments in his
name by an indulgence, if so be justice be satisfied through
the application of the satisfaction of Christ and his saints.
(Bellarm. de Indulg. l. 1, c. 5, sec. Jam vero.)
REPLY. What God binds, no person can untie; and what
he unties, no man can bind. But this course of indulgence,
still upheld in the Church of Rome, doth untie what God
doth bind; it makes sin easy and cheap, and prostitutes the
strict rules of Christianity to the basest purposes. For when
a person can have a plenary indulgence for so trivial a
satisfaction as the standing before the doors of St. Peter’s
Church at Rome, when the Pope blesses the people at Easter,
it makes sin as easy to be committed as pardoned.
Q. 17. How far do those indulgences extend?
A. Sometimes to days, sometimes to years, nay, some of
them were plenary indulgences;* some were for a discharge
from punishments here, others from the pains of purgatory,t
and some granted an eternal reward.
Q. 18. Upon what terms were those indulgences to be
obtained?
A. By money,t pilgrimages, § assisting the Pope, reciting
certain prayers."
* Bellarm. de Indulgent. l. 1, c. 9, init. “Plenary indulgence doth take
away all the punishment due to sin.” Ibid. sec. Indulgentiá Quadragen.
* Ibid. c. 7, sec. Et quidem.
# This is implied Concil. Trid. Sess. 21, c. 9, though it is called by the soft
name of alms.
§ So many are granted to particular churches in Rome, for the benefit of
pilgrims.
| So those that upon his motion took up arms against the Albigenses,
had by an indulgence the promise of an eternal reward. Baron. ad A. D. 1179,
n. 7.
"| So Pope Alexander VI. granted to those that recited this prayer to the
blessed Virgin, and St. Ann her mother, 30,000 years' indulgence.
RoMAN CATECHISM, AND REPLY. 97
REPLY. The scandal given by them was so notorious, that
order was given by the Council of Trent for reforming the
abuses of them; but when the Fathers thought fit not to dis
cover those abuses, and only forbad wicked gain, (Sess. 25,
Decret. de Indulg.,) they left a large scope for making a gain
of them. And two of the Popes under whom that Council sat,
viz., Paul III., and Julius III., (A Bull of Indulgence to the
Fraternity of the Altar, Paris, 1550, v. B. Taylor's Defence,
Part II., l. 2, p. 8) proceeded in the same course as their
predecessors, if they did not exceed them; for by their Bulls,
there is granted to all such of the Fraternity of the Holy Altar,
as visit the Church of St. Hilary of Chartres, during the six
weeks of Lent, 775,700 years of pardon, besides fourteen or
fifteen plenary indulgences. And since that, Urban VIII.,
(Bullar. to 3., p. 74) and Clement X., (A.D. 1671. Bull
upon the Canonization of five Saints,) have granted by their
indulgence a plenary remission of sins.
Q. 19. Upon what pretence or reason is the doctrine and
practice of indulgences founded ?
A. Upon works of supererogation,” that is, the overplus
of the satisfactions of Christ and the saints, which is a
treasury, (Concil. Trid. Sess., 21, c. 9) committed to the
Church’s custody,t and to be disposed of as she sees meet.
(Bellarm. Ibid. c. 3.)
REPLY. “The sufferings of this present time are not worthy
to be compared with the glory that shall be revealed in us;”
(Rom. viii. 18;) so 2 Cor. iv. 17. “Every one of us shall
give an account of himself to God.” (Rom. xiv. 12.) If there
be no comparison betwixt the reward and our sufferings for
it, then no one has merit to transfer to another; and if every
man must give an account of himself, then no man can be
saved by the merits of another. But suppose there is a
superabundance of satisfactions in the saints; yet what need
“Hail Mary ! full of grace : The Lord be with thee, thy grace with me !
Blessed be thou among women; and blessed be St. Ann thy mother, from whom,
O Virgin Mary, thou hast proceeded without sin and spot; but of thee hath
Jesus Christ been born, the Son of the living God. Amen.”
Thesaur. War. Exercit. in Grat. Sodal. B. V. M. Bruxel. Edit. 2 An. 1658,
p. 287.
* “That supererogation is necessary to indulgence, no one can deny,” saith
Bellarm. de Indulg. l. 1, c. 2, init.
+ So Pope Clem. VI., Constit. Extrav. in Bellarm. ibid. sec. ult,
WOL. X. II
98 ROMAN CATECHISM, AND REPLY.
is there of them, when there is such an infinite value in the
sufferings of Christ, who “by one offering hath for ever
perfected them that are sanctified;” (Heb. x. 14;) or who
gave the Church the power so to apply them?
Q. 20. Whither do the souls of those go that die in a state
of grace, but are not sufficiently purged from their sins, or
have not had a plenary indulgence for the remission of them?
A. Such go to purgatory, a place of torment in the other
world, near to hell, (Bellarm. de Purg., l. 2, c. 6, sec. Quinta
est,) where they are to continue till they have made full
satisfaction for their sins, and are throughly purged and
prepared for heaven, whereinto no unclean thing can enter.
(Catech. Rom., par. 1, c. 6, n. 3.)
Q. 21. How come those persons to be punished in the
other world, who depart in a state of grace out of this ?
A. Because they have not here fulfilled the penance
imposed upon them, or due from them to God. (Bellarm. de
Indulg, l. 1, c. 6, 7.) See Quest. 19.
REPLY. That those that die in a state of grace are yet in a
state of torment, and are to be purged in the other world, is
contrary to Scripture and antiquity. “There is no con
demnation to them which are in Christ Jesus.” (Rom. viii.
1.) “Whom he justified, them he also glorified.” (Verse
30.) “Who shall lay anything to the charge of God's elect?
It is God that justifieth: Who is he that condemneth?’”
(Verses 33, 34.) As justification and condemnation are here
opposed by the Apostle, so are condemnation and glorifica
tion; and he that is justified, upon the same reason that he
cannot be condemned, shall be glorified. Now, the elect are
justified before they go out of this world; and consequently
shall have nothing laid to their charge in the next.
“The servants of God then have peace, then enjoy quiet
rest and security; when, being drawn from these storms of
the world, we arrive at the haven of our everlasting habita
tion and security; when, this death being ended, we enter
into immortality.” (St. Cypr. de Mortal, sec. 2.)
“To-day shalt thou be with me in paradise.” (Luke
xxiii. 43.) Paradise is acknowledged to be the seat of the
blessed. (Bellarm. de Sanct. Beat., l. 1, c. 3, Testim. 4.)
Now, if there was a purgation necessary for sinners, he that
believed and repented not till the last moment of his life,
ROMAN CATECHISM, AND REPLY. 99
might be well supposed to need it; and should have been
sent rather to purgatory than paradise.
After the night of this life there is no purgation; and “it
is better to be corrected and purged now, than to be sent to
the torment there, where the time of punishing is and not of
purging.” (Greg. Nazianz. Orat. 15, in Plag. Grand.)
Q. 22. Of what continuance is the punishment of that state?
A. It is but for an appointed time; and the person is to
continue in it till he is purged from his sin, and has suffered
the punishment due to it. (Catech. Ibud.; Bellarm. De Purg.,
l. 2, c. 8, sec. Quantum ad primum.)
REPLY. The state that believers immediately enter upon
after death, is said to be “life” for the comfort, and “ever
lasting” for the continuance, of it.
“He that believeth on Him that sent me hath everlasting
life, and shall not come into condemnation; but is passed
from death unto life.” (John v. 24.)
So St. Cyprian: “The end of this life being completed, we
are divided into the habitations of everlasting, either death or
immortality.” (Ad Demetr., sec. 16.)
Q. 23. Is there no way by which the souls of those that
are in purgatory may be delivered out of that prison, and
their time of torment shortened?
A. They may be helped and delivered by the suffrages of
the faithful that are alive; that is, by prayers, alms, and
masses; and other works of piety, such as indulgences.
(Concil. Trid, Sess. 25, Decr. de Purgat.; Sess. 22, can. 3.
Bellarm. de Purgat., l. 2, c. 16, sec. Ad haec.)
REPLY. “Betwixt us and you there is a great gulf fixed,
so that they which would pass from hence to you” (to relieve
you) “cannot.” (Luke xvi. 26.)
As the state in which Abraham and Lazarus were, needed ni
relief; so that in which the rich man was, could not obtain it.
“After death is no help to be gotten by godliness or repent
ance. Lazarus doth not there go to the rich man, nor the
rich man unto Lazarus. For the garners are sealed up, and
the time is fulfilled.” (Epiphanius contr. Cathar., Haer. 59.)
And if a man’s own repentance cannot help him, much less
can another's good works profit him.
So St. Jerome: “While we are in this world, we may be
II 2
100 ROMAN CATECHISM, AND REPLY.
able to help one another, either by our prayers, or by our
counsels: But when we shall come before the judgment-seat
of Christ, neither Job, nor Daniel, nor Noah, can intreat for
any one; but every one must bear his own burden.” (Lib. 3,
Com. in Galat., c. 6.) And he elsewhere saith: “What shall
be to all in the day of judgment, this is accomplished to
every one at the day of death.” (In Joel, c. 2.)
Q. 24. Is the doctrine of purgatory a matter of faith, and
necessary to be believed ?
A. Yes: For whosoever shall say that there is no debt of
temporal punishment to be paid, either in this world or in
purgatory, before there can be an admission into heaven, is
accursed. (Concil. Trid, Sess. 6, Can. 30, & Sess. 25, Decret.
de Purg.) And whosoever shall say, The sacrifice of the mass
is not to be used for the dead, is accursed. (Ibid., Sess. 22,
Can. 3.) This is one of the principles, without the belief of
which there is no salvation. (Bulla Pii Quarti.)
REPLY. Bishop Fisher saith, that there is none or very little
mention of purgatory among the ancients. (Roffens. Luther?
Confut., Art. 18; & Polyd. Virg. de Invent. l. 8, c. 1.) It is
then no little encroachment on the Christian world, to make
it now a doctrine of faith, and to require it, upon pain of
damnation, to be believed.
Q. 25. In what place were the souls of the Patriarchs, and
other good men, before the coming of Christ?
A. Before the death and resurrection, (Catech. Rom.,
par. 1, c. 6, n. 3, 6,) or ascension of Christ, (Bellarm. de
Christ., l. 4, c. 11,) the gates of heaven were open to none;
and the souls of good men departed were detained in a
certain place called Limbus Patrum, which is the uppermost
part of hell; the lowermost being the place of the damned;
next above that, purgatory; next to that, limbus infantum;
above that, limbus patrum. (Bellarm. de Purg. l. 2, c. 6, sec.
Quod autem.)
REPLY. We read that Elijah was taken up into heaven,
(2 Kings ii. 11,) and he and Moses appeared in glory. (Luke
ix. 30; Matt. xvii. 2.) And Abraham is represented as in
paradise, the blessed abode of good men in the other world.
(Luke xvi. 23.)
So St. Austin expounds it: “The bosom of Abraham is
RoMAN CATECHISM, AND REPLY. 101
the rest of the blessed poor, whose is the kingdom of heaven,
into which, after this life, they are received.” (Quaest.
Evangel, l. 2, c. 38.)
Q. 26. In what condition were they while thus detained in
limbo ?
A. They are not agreed in the nature and condition of the
place: For the Catechism saith, “They were sustained by
hope, and were without any sense of grief.” (N. 3.) And
presently, that, “although they were without other sense
of grief, yet, being kept in suspense, they were tormented with
the hope of that blessed glory which they did expect.” (N. 4.)
REPLY. But the Scripture tells us, that the state where
Abraham was, was not only a state of rest, but also of comfort.
(Luke xvi. 25.)
Q. 27. How and when were they delivered thence?
A. They were delivered by Christ at his descent into hell;
(Catech. Rom, ibid., n.5, 6;) so that ever since that place
remains empty. (Bellarm. de Purg., l. 2, c. 6, sec. Octava est.)
REPLY. The Scripture says not one word of this.
Q. 28. What use do they make of this doctrine?
A. Hereby they give a reason why there is neither precept
nor example in the Old Testament for the invocation of saints
departed, (Bellarm. de Sanct. Beat., l. 1, c. 19, sec. Item
Exod,) because they were, for their punishment, enclosed in
this place, and were there held bound by the devils, till delivered
by Christ. (Catech. Rom, ibid., n. 5.) And so the people of
those times only prayed to God; and did not use to say,
“Holy Abraham, pray for me.” (Bellarm, ibid.)
REPLY. There is neither precept nor example for the invo
cation of saints in the New Testament; and if that be a reason
for a limbus before Christ, it may be a reason for a limbus
still; and they may as well exclude the saints from heaven
now as then, if there be no more for their invocation in the
New Testament than was in the Old. Thus Salmero, a
learned disputant in the Council of Trent: “Invocations
of saints have no express ground in all the Scriptures.”
(Ad 1 Tim. 2, Disp. 7, sec. Sed cum autem et nec obstat.)
102 ROMAN CATECHISM, AND REPLY.
SECTION III.
OF DIVINE WORSHIP.
QUESTION 29. Of what doth the service in the Roman
Church consist?
ANswer. It consists of prayers and hymns offered to God,
angels, and saints; of lessons taken out of the Scriptures,
and legends; and of profession of faith in the creeds.
REPLY. Cardinal Quignonius, at the instance of Pope
Paul the Third, reformed the Breviary; and instead of
legends, set Scriptures for the lessons. But Pope Pius
Quintus, who afterward undertook to reform it also, pro
hibited that of Quignonius, (Bulla Prefixa Breviar. Rom.
Jussu Pii V. Edit.,) and instead of the Scriptures, placed
legends again; and so it continues.
Q. 30. In what language is their service performed?
A. It is performed in all places among them in the Latin
tongue, which is in no place vulgarly understood.
Q. 31. Is the having the service in an unknown tongue
enjoined in the Church of Rome?
A. Yes: It is required that it should be celebrated in the
Latin tongue; and whosoever shall say that it ought only to
be administered in the vulgar tongue is accursed. (Concil.
Trid., Sess. 23, c. 8, & Can. 9.) Hence, when of late years the
Missal, or Mass-book, was translated into French, it was
declared, by Pope Alexander the Seventh, to be a “seed
plot of disobedience, rashness, and schism;” and he calls
them that did it, “ sons of perdition; ” and doth “condemn,
reprobate, and forbid” that Missal.
REPLY. In divine worship, (as in all other actions,) the
first thing to be considered is the end, and the next thing
is the means conducing to that end. The end is the honour
of God, and the edification of the Church; and then God is
honoured, when the Church is edified. The means conducing
to that end, are to have the service so administered as may
inform the mind, engage the affections, and increase devotion:
But that cannot be done, where the tongue it is celebrated
in is not understood.
Thus we are taught by the Apostle: “He that speaketh in
an unknown tongue speaketh not unto men.” (1 Cor. xiv. 2.)
ROMAN CATECHISM, AND REPLY. 103*
“If I know not the meaning of the voice, he that speaketh
shall be a barbarian unto me.” (Verse 11.) “If thou shalt
bless with the Spirit,” (by the gift of an unknown tongue,)
“how shall he that occupieth the room of the unlearned say
Amen at thy giving of thanks?” (Verse 16.) How can the
people be attentive to the lessons, answer at the responses, be
devout in the prayers, profess their faith in the creeds, when
they do not understand what is read, prayed, or professed ?
Thus St. Ambrose, on 1 Cor. xiv.: “It is evident that the
mind is ignorant where the tongue is not understood. The
unskilful person, hearing what he doth not understand, knows
not the conclusion of the prayer, and doth not answer, Amen.”
Q. 32. What are the objects of worship in the Church of
Rome?
A. Besides the blessed Trinity, angels, the Virgin Mary,
and saints.
REPLY. Our Saviour says, “Thou shalt worship the Lord
thy God, and him only shalt thou serve.” (Matt. iv. 10.) As
divine worship is due to God, so it is not lawful to give it to
any other.
The Church of Rome doth acknowledge this, but says the
worship they give to saints and angels is not of that kind
(Catech. Rom., par. 3, c. 2, n. 8, par. 4, c. 6, n. 3.)
But what worship is peculiar to God, if prayer is not? So
thought St. Ambrose: “Thou only art to be invocated.” (De
Obitu Theodos.)
For God alone can receive our prayer, or can give what we
pray for, or be the object of our faith and trust.
Q. 33. What honour do they give to the angels?
A. (1.) The Church of Rome teaches that angels are to be
worshipped, (Catech. Rom., par. 3, c. 2, n. 8, 9, venerari,
adorare, colere,) invoked, and prayed to. (Ibid., n. 10.) And
they have litanies and prayers composed for this purpose.
(Litaniae, sec. Angelorum, vid. Horologium Tutelaris Angeli a
Drexelio. p. 84, Duac. 1623.)
A. (2.) They teach, that as every particular person hath a
guardian angel from his birth, (Catech. Rom., par. 4, cap. 9,
sec. 1, n. 4, 6,) so it is fit to commit themselves more parti
cularly to him, (Horolog. Drex., p. 108,) after this manner:
“Blessed angel ! to whose care our loving Creator hath
104 ROMAN CATECHISM, AND REPLY.
committed me, defend me this day, I beseech you, from all
dangers, and direct me in the way I ought to walk.” (The
Child’s Catechism, 1678.)
REPLY. We honour the holy angels, as they are God’s
ministers, and are “sent forth to minister unto them that shall
be heirs of salvation.” (Heb. i. 14.) But, to worship or pray
to them, we dare not, as it is what they themselves refuse and
abhor, (Rev. xix. 10,) and the Scripture doth condemn as “a
sign of a fleshly mind, vainly intruding into those things which
we have not seen.” (Col. ii. 18.) Theodoret, upon this text,
saith, that the practice of worshipping angels continued a long
time in Phrygia and Pisidia; wherefore the Synod of Laodicea
doth forbid praying to angels: “For Christians ought not to
forsake the Church of God, and depart aside and invocate
angels, which are things forbidden.” (Conc. Laod, Can. 35.)
Q. 34. What religious honour do they give to the saints?
A. They pray to them as their intercessors, make confessions
to them, offer incense, and make vows to them, venerate their
images and relics.
Q. 35. For what reason do they pray to saints?
A. That by their help they may obtain benefits from God,
(Concil. Trid, Sess. 25, de Invocat.,) who doth confer many
favours upon mankind, by their merit, and grace, and inter
cession. (Catech. Rom., par. 3, c. 2, sec. 12.–Missal. Rom.
proprium Missarum de Sanctis.)
Q. 36. After what manner do they pray to saints?
A. They pray to them as favourites with God, that they
would take them into their protection, and would obtain those
things of God for them which they want. Therefore they
plead that they have two different forms of prayers; for to God
they properly say, “Have mercy upon us, hear us:” To a
saint, “Pray for us.” (Catech. Rom., par. 4, c. 6, n. 3.)
Q. 37. But have they not those forms in their Missals,
Breviaries, and common books of devotion, which are parti
cularly and immediately applied to the saints for obtaining
what they want?
A. Yes; it is too manifest to be denied; and though they
have been more sparing of late years, yet nothing formerly
more frequent. As, for instance: In a Missal printed at
Paris, an. 1520, fol. 51, there is this prayer to St. Agnes:—
“O Agnes, woman of the Lamb, do thou enlighten us
RoMAN CATECHISM, AND REPLY. 105
within | Destroy the roots of sin, O excellent Lady. After
the grievances of the world, do thou translate us to the
company of the blessed!”
REPLY. “There is one God, and one Mediator between
God and men, the Man Christ Jesus; who gave himself a
ransom for all.” (1 Tim. ii. 5, 6.)
“Who is he that condemneth? It is Christ that died,
yea, rather, that is risen again, who is even at the right hand
of God, who also maketh intercession for us.” (Rom. viii. 34.)
As there is but one God to us, though “there are gods many,
and lords many;” (1 Cor. viii. 5;) so to us there is but “one
Mediator,” or Intercessor, though we should grant there are
many intercessors and mediators. For though the angels and
saints may intercede for us in heaven, that no more makes them
such intercessors as we may pray to, than because there are
gods many, we may pray to them, as we do to the true God.
The Scripture knows no difference between a Mediator of
intercession and redemption: He alone makes intercession
for us that died and rose, and is at the right hand of God.
And He alone has a right to our prayers, and to Him alone
may we address them.
So Origen: “All prayers, and supplications, and thanks
givings, are to be sent up to God the Lord of all, by that
High Priest who is above all angels, being the living Word
of God.” (Lib. 5, Cont. Cels., pp. 233,239.)
So again: “We ought to pray only to the God over all,
and his only Son, the first-born of every creature, who, as
our High Priest, offers his prayers to his God, and our God.”
(Lib. 8, pp. 395,402.)
To have other mediators and intercessors is “not to hold
the Head,” (Coloss. ii. 19,) in the judgment of the Apostle,
and the Council of Laodicea, where it is said, “Christians
ought not to forsake the Church and invocate angels. If any
man, therefore, be found to give himself to this privy idolatry,
let him be anathema; because he hath forsaken our Lord
Jesus, the Son of God, and betaken himself to idolatry.”
Q. 38. What is the worship they give to the Virgin Mary?
A. They fly unto her as the advocatrix of the faithful, the
mother of God; that by prayer to her they may obtain help
through her most excellent merits with God. (Catech. Rom.,
par. 4, cap. 5, n. 8.)
106 ROMAN CATECIIISM, AND REPLY.
REPLY. We honour this blessed Virgin as the mother of the
holy Jesus, and as she was a person of eminent piety; but we
do not think it lawful to give that honour to her which belongs
not to a creature, and doth equal her with her Redeemer.
Q. 39. Have they not some singular forms of devotion to
l:er ?
A. Yes; for apprehending her to be in glory superior to
all created beings, they offer a service to her, beyond what
they give either to angels or saints.
Q. 40. After what manner do they apply themselves to her?
A. According to some Missals, they ask her to command her
Son, by the right and authority of a mother; (Missal. Paris.
Anno 1520, folio 65;) or, as it is in the Breviaries used at this
day, “Show thyself a mother.” (Brev. Rom. Fest. Assump.)
They pray to her, that she would loose the bands of the guilty,
bring light to the blind, would make them mild and chaste, and
cause their hearts to burn in love to Christ. (Officium B. M.
in the hymn called Planctus B. M., Antwerp, 1641.)
In a book printed lately in London, the author saith, that
“whatever gifts are bestowed upon us by Jesus, we receive
them by the mediation of Mary; no one being gracious to
Jesus that is not devoted to Mary; that the power of Mary
in the kingdom of Jesus is suitable to her maternity; and
though the condition of some great sinners may be so deplor
able, that the limited excellency and merits cannot effectually
bend the mercies of Jesus to relieve them; yet such is the
acceptableness of the mother of Jesus to Jesus, that whoso
ever is under the verge of her protection, may confide in her
intercession to Jesus;” that the person devoted to her, is to
beg of her to accompany him as his “sacred guide, advocate,
and champion, against the assaults of sin and sensuality.”
(Contemplations of the Life and Glory of Holy Mary, &c., pp.
7–9, 14. Printed anno 1685.)
Much after the fore-cited manner did the Council of Con
stance invoke the blessed Virgin, as other Councils used to do
the Holy Ghost, calling her the “mother of grace, the fountain
of mercy;” and they call on her for “light from heaven.”
REPLY. We cannot but wonder at the applications made to
the blessed Virgin in the Church of Rome, whose acts on earth,
and whose power in heaven, the Scripture doth very sparingly
relate, or is altogether silent in. We read nothing there of her
ROMAN CATECHISM, AND REPLY. 107
bodily assumption into heaven, nor of her exaltation to a
throne above angels and archangels. (Brev. Rom. AEstiv. Fest.
Assump.) We read nothing there of her being the mother
of grace and mercy, (Officium parvum B. M. ad Matutin.,
Catech. par. 4, c. 5, n. 8,) the queen and gate of heaven, the
advocatrix of sinners; (Completor. Catech. par. 4, c. 5, n.8;)
and of her power in destroying all heresies in the world,
(Fest. Assump.,) and being all things to all. (Missale Paris.
ibid. & Le Psaultier de Jesus. Paris, 1620, p. 126.)
When we read so much of the blessed Virgin in books of
this kind, and so little of her in the divine writings, we cannot
but reflect upon what is said by Epiphanius, of a certain sect
of women that in his time offered cakes to the Virgin Mary,
which he calls an “impious thing,” and altogether “contrary
to the doctrine of the Holy Ghost.” (Haeres. 78, p. 1054. Par.
1622.) And he further adds, “This the Holy Ghost doth
warn us of, in that Christ saith, ‘Woman, what have I to do
with thee?” where he calls her woman, and as it were prophe
sying, to refute those schisms and heresies which he knew
would arise in the world; and that no one, being moved by a
certain admiration of the blessed Virgin, might turn himself
to those dotages of heresies.” And he adds, “Let the Virgin
Mary be honoured, but the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost be
adored.” (Haeres., 79, n. 4, 7, &c.) Much more hath that
Father there to this purpose.
But what would this Father have said, if, instead of a chair
adorned and set forth in honour of the Virgin Mary, (as those
women did,) he had found her advanced to a throne of a
mediatrix in heaven? What, if instead of cakes, there had
been litanies and prayers offered to her, and that in more
abundance than to Christ himself? What, if he had found
them praying, “O holy mother, succour the miserable, help
the weak, comfort those that mourn?” (Breviar. Rom. AEstiv.
Suffragia.) I doubt not but he would have said of this, what
he doth of the other, that they “would obtrude her upon us
for God;” and have called it “heresy and idolatry.”
Q. 41. What external representations or memorials have
they in the Church of Rome, which they give veneration and
worship to?
A. They have the relics and images of the Virgin Mary
and saints (Concil. Trid, Sess. 25, de Invoc.)
108 ROMAN CATECH1SM, AND REPLY.
Q. 42. What do they mean by relics?
A. The bodies or remainders of them, or particular things
belonging or relating to them when alive, as an arm, or thigh,
bones, or ashes; (Ex Decret. Regist. Praefix. Brev. Rom.;)
and the part in which they suffered; (Catech. Rom, par. 3,
c. 2, n. 15;) or the things by which they suffered; as the
chains with which St. Peter was bound. (Brev. Rom. Par.
AEstiv. Aug. Fest. Petri ad Vinc.)
REPLY. “He” (God by Michael) “buried Moses; but no
man knoweth of his sepulchre unto this day.” (Deut. xxxiv. 6.)
S. Barradas the Jesuit, upon the place, saith, “It is the
common opinion of Lyra, Abulensis, Cajetan, and others, that
the sepulchre was hid, lest the Israelites, who were inclined
to the worship of idols, should worship Moses as God. For
they say, that when the devil would for that reason have
showed the grave and the body of Moses to the Israelites, St.
Michael hindered; and this was the contention spoken of
Jude 9.” (Seb. Barrad. Itinerar. Fil. Israel.)
They could give no greater honour to the body of Moses,
than is given to relics in the Church of Rome; and if that
was idolatry, and Moses’s body was concealed to prevent it,
then there is as much reason to think it unlawful now in this
case, as it was then in that.
Q. 43. For what cause do they show this regard to relics?
A. By the veneration of them they obtain the help of the
saints (Concil. Trid, Sess. 25, de Invocat.) whom the relics
relate to ; and many benefits are thereby conferred by God
upon mankind; for by these the dead have been raised, the
infirm cured, and devils cast out. (Catech. Rom, ibid.; Breviar.
Rom., ibid.)
REPLY. We read of Hezekiah, (2 Kings xviii. 4) that he
“brake in pieces the brazen serpent that Moses had made:”
And the reason was, because the children of Israel did burn
incense to it. The brazen serpent was of God’s own institu
tion; (Num. xxi. 8;) by looking up to which, the people were
formerly cured. And though it was preserved as a memorial
of that divine operation; yet, when abused to idolatry, he cut
it in pieces. And were these truly relics of saints, and did
work those miracles they pretend, it would be no reason for
that reverence and worship they give to them; but the
reverence and worship given to them should, according to
ROMAN CATECHISM, AND REPLY. 109
good King Hezekiah’s practice, be a reason to give them a
decent interment.
Q. 44. What kind of reverence or worship is required to
be given to images and pictures in the Church of Rome?
A. They kiss them, uncover the head, and fall down, before
them; offer incense, and pray to them, and use all such pos
tures of worship as they would do to the person or persons
thereby represented, (whether Christ, the Virgin Mary, or
other saints,) if they were present: And whosoever doth think
otherwise, is accursed. (Concil. Trid., Sess. 25, de Invocat.
Catech. Rom., par. 4, c. 6, n. 4.) And accordingly, the Priest
is to direct the people to them, that they may be worshipped.
(Ut Colantur, Catech. Rom., par. 3, c. 2, n. 24.)
REPLY. On the contrary, the Second Commandment teaches
us, “Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image, or
any likeness of anything that is in heaven above,” &c. “Thou
shalt not bow down thyself to them, nor serve them.” In
which there are two words to be considered: The one, pesel,
which we rightly translate graven image; for it properly
signifies anything carved and cut out of wood or stone; and
so it is about forty times rendered in the Greek translation,
7 Aurlov, “a graven thing.” So that an idol and an image are
there forbidden. The next word is themunah, which doth
properly signify a similitude or likeness, (as is confessed,) and
is always so translated. And thus it was understood by the
Fathers. So Justin Martyr, when he recites this law, saith,
“God forbad every image and similitude,” sixova was ouoloux.
And therefore Cassander grants that the ancient Christians
“abhorred all veneration of images.” (Consult, art. 21, de
Imagin.) Indeed, the command is so express against this
practice, that there has been a kind of self-condemnation in
the Church of Rome; whilst they commonly either altogether
leave out this Commandment, (The Child's Catechism, printed
1678) or render it imperfectly and by halves: “Thou shalt
not make to thee an idol.”
Q. 45. What do they profess is their intention in the
reverence they give to images and pictures?
A. They declare that the honour given to images and
pictures is referred to the prototypes, (Concil. Trid, ibid.,)
or the persons represented by them, whether God the Father,
110 ROMAN CATECHISM, AND REPLY.
Christ, angels, or saints; and when they fall down before
the image or picture, they worship God, or Christ, the angel,
or saint.
REPLY. If an image be a representation of a divine person,
and worship be due to the image for the sake of the person
represented in it; then, such as the person is, such must the
worship be that is due to his image; and what is due to the
person, if present, is due to the image in his absence. For to
give one honour to the person, and another to the image; a
superior to the person, and an inferior to the image; is to
terminate the worship in the image, and not pass it from thence
to the person, as Gretser, the Jesuit, argues: (De Cruce, l. 1,
c. 49, sec. Secundo itaque :) But if it be to pass from the
image unto the person, then we know what they do when they
kiss, and uncover their heads, and bow down to, and worship,
an image; and have reason to remember the Apostle's advice:
“Keep yourselves from idols.” (1 John v. 21.)
Q. 46. What regard have they to the material cross or
crucifix?
A. (1.) They ascribe peculiar virtue to it, and pray that God
would make the wood of the cross to “be the stability of faith,
an increase of good works, the redemption of souls.” (Ponti
ficale in Bened. Novae Crucis.)
(2.) They use all expressions of outward adoration, by kiss
ings and prostrations, &c. (Missale Fer. 6, In Parasc.)
(3.) They pray directly to it, to “increase grace in the
godly, and blot out the sins of the guilty.” (Ibid., Sub Ante
Domin. Pass. et Fest. Invent. Crucis.)
(4.) They give latria to it, which is the sovereign worship
that is peculiar to God. (Pontif Rom. Ordo ad Recep. Imper.
Rubr. 1, et Gretser de Cruce, l. 1, c. 49.)
REPLY. The Church of Rome, though without any autho
rity from Scripture, (which uses the words promiscuously,)*
makes a distinction between latria and doulia: The former is
the worship they give to God; the latter the worship they give
to saints. Now, they grant, that to give latria, or sovereign
worship, to any besides God, is idolatry; and that, were not
the host the very body and blood of Christ, it would be no
less than idolatry to give that honour to the host, which they
* EösAevdate, “Ye did service to them that were no gods.” (Gal. iv. 8.)
Exarpevaav, “They served the creature.” (Rom. i. 25.)
ROMAN CATECHISM, AND REPLY. 11]
give to Christ: We understand, then, how to call that worship
they give to the cross: They themselves call it latria; so we
may, by their leave, call it idolatry. For whatever the host
is, the cross is but a representation, and not the person
worshipped.
Q. 47. Do they think it lawful to represent God and the
blessed Trinity by pictures and images, and to worship them?
A. Such pictures are not only almost everywhere received
in the Church of Rome, but universally tolerated; (Bellarm.
de Imag., l. 2, c. 8, sec. Ultimo probatur;) and are both
recommended as expedient for the people. (Concil. Trid,
Sess. 25, de Sacr. Imag. Catech. Rom., par. 3, c. 2, n. 20,)
and proposed to them to be worshipped. (Cajetan. in Aquin.,
q. 25, art. 3.)
REPLY. There is nothing more expressly forbidden in
Scripture, than the making any image or representation of
God: “Take ye good heed unto yourselves, (for ye saw no
manner of similitude,) lest ye corrupt yourselves; and make
you a graven image, the similitude of any figure.” (Deut. iv.
15, 16.) If it had been acceptable to God, he would have
chosen a similitude to appear in ; but seeing he did not,
they were not to presume to make one for him. This is to
“change his glory.” (Rom. i. 21, &c.) And “to place such
an image in a Christian temple is abominable,” saith St.
Austin. (De Fide et Symb., c. 7.) And “thus to describe
the Trinity, is a deformation of it,” saith Cassander. (Art.
21, sec. de Imag.)
Q. 48. Upon what pretence do they make such representa
tions of God?
A. They say, they thereby represent not God, but some of
his properties and actions, after the manner they are described
in Scripture; as when “the Ancient of days” is said to “sit
on a throne, having the books opened before him; ” (Dan.
vii. 9, 10;) thereby signifying his etermity and infinite wisdom.
(Catech. Rom., ibid.)
REPLY. But what is this to those images and pictures used
by them which have no resemblance in Scripture? Such are
their descriptions of the Trinity in Unity, as of God the
Father like an old man, having the Son lying in his bosom,
and the IIoly Ghost over his head like a dove.
112 ROMAN CATECHISM, AND REPLY.
(2.) God himself never appeared in any form; and so the
resemblance in Daniel was only a prophetical scheme, and did
no more belong to God than the eyes and ears that are ascribed
to him in Scripture.
(3) God cannot be represented at all, but by such proper
ties and effects: But if an image of God be forbidden to be
worshipped, then the image, even by such properties and
effects, is forbidden to be worshipped.
Q. 49. But are not such descriptions of God, the way to
represent him, as if he was like unto one of us?
A. Such pictures are not without danger to be exposed to
such as cannot read the Scriptures, if they are not taught that
they are to be taken metaphorically. (Bellarm. de Imag., l. 2,
c. 8, sec. Respondent.)
REPLY. Cassander saith, “I wish those from whom this
information is to be received, were not the authors of these
superstitions; ” and he adds, “That the teaching is not enough,
without the occasions be removed.” (Art. 21, de Imag.)
This he saith of all images, but more especially of such as are
made to represent God.
SECTION IV.
OF THE SACRAMENTS.
QUESTION 50. WHAT is a sacrament?
ANswer. A sacrament is a sensible thing, which by the
institution of God hath a power, as well of causing, as of
signifying, holiness and righteousness. (Catech. Rom., par. 2,
cap. 1, n. 11.)
Q. 51. How many sacraments are there in the Church of
Rome?
A. There are seven; namely, baptism, confirmation,
eucharist, penance, extreme unction, orders, and matrimony.
(Concil. Trid., Sess. 7, Can. 1.)
Q. 52. Is this number determined to be a matter of faith?
A. Whosoever saith, that there are more or fewer than seven
instituted by Christ, or that any of the seven are not truly
and properly sacraments, is accursed. (Ibid.)
REPLY. Cassander saith, that we shall not easily find any
RoMAN CATECHISM, AND REPLY. 113
before Peter Lombard, who lived about 1139, that did define
the number of the sacraments. (Art. 13., sec. De Num.
Sacram.) And St. Austin is very positive that there are but
two of divine institution.* Now, that there should be
sacraments of divine institution, that are neither instituted
in the gospel, nor known to be so till 1100 years after our
Saviour, nor be made a matter of faith till 1500, may be a
doctrine received in the Church of Rome, but will not easily
be believed by any out of it.
Q. 53. What are the parts of a sacrament?
A. The parts of a sacrament are the matter or element, and
the form of words of consecration: So the matter in baptism
is water; the form is, “I baptize thee,” &c.
REPLY. That a sacrament should consist of matter and
form, and yet either have no form, as confirmation and extreme
unction; or have neither matter nor form, of divine institu
tion, as penance and matrimony, is to make them sacraments,
and to be none. Our Church rightly affirms of the additional
sacraments, they have not any visible sign ordained of God.
(Article 25.)
Q. 54. Of what virtue are the sacraments?
A. The sacraments contain the grace which they signify,
and confer grace ex opere operato, “by the work itself,” upon
such as do not put an obstruction. (Concil. Trid, ibid., can.
6, 8.) For these sensible and natural things work by the
almighty power of God in the sacraments, what they could
not do by their own power. (Catech. Rom., ibid., n. 27.)
REPLY. It is not sufficient that adult persons have no indis
position to receive the grace of the sacraments; for there is
also required a mind well-instructed, a sound belief, and a
heart well inclined for that purpose. (2.) The virtue in the
sacraments doth not proceed from the mere elements and words,
but from the blessing of God in consequence of his promise to
such only as rightly partake of them, and are qualified for it.
Q. 55. What is necessary to a sacrament on the part of
those that officiate?
* “Our Lord Jesus Christ,” saith he, “hath knit Christians together, with
sacraments most few in number, most easy to be kept, most excellent in significa
tion; as are baptism and the Lord's supper.”—Epist. ad Januar. 118.
VOL. X.
114 ROMAN CATECHISM, AND REPLY.
A. It is absolutely necessary, that those that make and
consecrate the sacraments have an intention of doing at least
what the Church doeth, and doth intend to do. (Concil. Trid.,
ibid., can. 11.)
REPLY. From hence it follows, that if there be no inten
tion, the sacraments are none. And so there is no certainty
whether the Priest be a Priest, or whether in the eucharist
the elements continue not elements after consecration, and
what is taken for the host be no other than bread. For without
the intention, neither is the Priest ordained, nor are the
elements consecrated.
OF BAPTISM.
Q. 56. Who may administer the sacrament of baptism?
A. It chiefly belongs to Bishops, Priests, and Deacons;
but, in case of necessity, men or women, Jews, infidels, or
heretics may do it, if they intend to do what the Church
doeth. (Concil. Trid, Sess. 7, De Bapt., can. 4; Catech.
Rom., pars 2, c. 2, n. 24.)
REPLY. Our Saviour gave commission to the Apostles and
their successors, in the office of the ministry, to “teach all
nations, baptizing them.” (Matt. xxviii. 19, 20.) So that
women, Jews, and infidels, have no more a power to admi
nister baptism, than they have to teach, or to be Priests.
Q. 57. What ceremonies are used in the administration of
baptism in the Church of Rome?
A. Before baptism, there is, (1.) Chrism, or oil mixed with
water, in the consecration of it. (Catech., ibid., n. 11, 60.)
(2.) Exorcism, composed of certain words, prayers, and
actions, for driving away the devil out of the child, and the
salt, &c. (Catech., ibid., n. 65.) And the Priest is to blow in
the face of the child, after the form of a cross, saying, “Go
out of him, Satan,” &c. (Pastorale, Antwerp, 1625.)
(3.) The forehead, eyes, breast, &c., are to be crossed, to
show that, by the mystery of baptism, the senses are opened
to receive God, and to understand his commands. (Catech.,
n.67; Pastor., ibid.)
(4.) Then some exorcised salt is to be put into the mouth,
to signify a deliverance from the putrefaction of sin, and the
savour of good works. (Catech., ibid., n. 66.) And the Priest
in putting it into the mouth, saith, “N, take the salt of
ROMAN CATECHISM, AND REPLY. 115
wisdom, and let it be a propitiation for thee to eternal life.
Amen.” (Pastor, ibid.)
(5.) Then the nose and ears are to be anointed with
spittle, and then the child is to be brought to the water, as
the blind man to Siloam, to signify it brings light to the
mind. (Catech., ibid., n. 60.)
After baptism, (1.) The Priest anoints the top of the head
with chrism; (Catech., ibid., n. 72;) and he adds, “Let him
anoint thee with the chrism of salvation.” (Pastor., ibid.)
(2.) He puts a white garment on the baptized, saying,
“Take this white garment, which thou mayest bring before
the judgment-seat of Christ, that thou mayest have life
eternal.” (Catech., ibid., n. 73.)
(3.) A lighted candle is put into the hand, to show a faith
inflamed with charity, and nourished with good works. (Ibid.,
n. 74.)
REPLY. It is pleaded for these ceremonies, that they are
appointed for the majesty of divine worship; and that the
benefits contained in the sacraments may be better imprinted
on the mind. (Catech, par. 2, c. 2, n. 59.)
But can we think it for the majesty of baptism to have it
dressed up like a form of conjuration, that the child must be
supposed to be possessed with the devil, and the Priest must
blow in his face three times, with, “Get thee out, Satan,”
before he can say, “Peace be with thee; ” and that he must
cross him half a score times, or more, from part to part, in
preparation to baptism?
Can we think it for the majesty of it, to have salt exorcised
in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and to be
put into the mouth of the child, for a propitiation unto
eternal life? Can we think it for the majesty of this ordinance,
that the Priest should put some of his own spittle in his left
hand, and then taking it thence with the thumb and fore
finger of his right hand, touch both ears of the infant, and
say, “Ephphatha, be thou opened !” and then his nostrils,
and say, “For the odour of sweetness; but thou, O devil,
fly;” and then on his right hand, after the manner of a cross,
saying, “N, I deliver unto thee the mark of our Lord Jesus
Christ, (t)* that thou mayest drive the adversary from thee
on every side, and have life eternal?”
And what are the benefits imprinted on the mind by these
* N.B. Where this mark (+) stands, the sign of the cross is made.
I 2
116 ROMAN CATECHISM, AND REPLY.
fantastical ceremonies? Or when is it such benefits are
promised as these are said to signify? Is it not rather
a debasing of it, to have such rites and prayers introduced
into it, as signify that which baptism was never appointed
for? To give an instance in the salt used in it:—
THE EXORCISM OF THE SALT.
“I exorcise thee, O creature of salt, in the name of the
Father (t) Omnipotent, and in the love of our (t) Lord Jesus
Christ, and in the virtue of the Holy (t) Spirit. I exorcise
thee by the living (+) God, by the true (t) God, by the holy
(+) God, who hath created thee for the safeguard of mankind,
and hath commanded it to be consecrated by his servants for
the people that come to believe, that in the name of the holy
Trinity thou beest made a wholesome sacrament to put
the enemy to flight. Therefore we pray thee, O our Lord
God, that in sanctifying (t) thou dost sanctify this creature
of salt, and in blessing (t) thou dost bless it, that it may be a
perfect medicine to all that take it.”
OF CONFIRMATION.
Q. 58. Is confirmation a sacrament?
A. It is, properly and truly; and whosoever holds otherwise
is accursed. (Concil. Trid, Sess. 7, de Confirm., can. 1.)
REPLY. The Roman Catechism saith, that sacraments
cannot be instituted by any but God. (Catech., ibid., n. 6.)
And yet the great Schoolman, Alex. Ales, saith, “Christ did
not institute nor declare confirmation to be a sacrament.”
(Pars 4, q.4, m. 1.) So by their own confession it is none.
Q. 59. What is the matter of the sacrament of confirmation?
A. The matter is chrism, which is an ointment compounded
of oil-olive and balsam, and consecrated by the Bishop (Cate.
Rom., par. 2, c. 3, n. 2, 7, 27) upon Maundy-Thursday.
(Sum of Christian Doctrine, London, 1686.)
REPLY. That chrism is either of divine institution, or the
matter of a sacrament, may be said, but cannot be proved.
Q. 60. What is the form of consecration?
A. The form is the words used by the Bishop, when he
crosses the forehead with the chrism, viz., “I sign thee with
ROMAN CATECHISM, AND REPLY. 117
the sign of the cross, and I confirm thee with the chrism of
salvation, in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.”
(Catech., n. 2, 11.)
REPLY. It is said that Christ instituted the matter and form
of confirmation from the authority of Pope Fabian; (pars 4,
q. 3, m. 2, n. 3, & q. 9, m. l;) but Alexander Ales saith, it
was ordained by the Meldensian Council. (Catech. Rom., ibid.,
n. 6, 12, et Bellarminus de Confirm., c. 2.) And indeed the
Roman Catechism, after some pretence to divine institution,
thinks it safest to resolve it into the authority of the Church.
Q. 61. What ceremonies are used in confirmation?
A. (1.) In the anointing, the Bishop dips the tip of his
finger in the chrism, and, making a cross, saith, “I sign
thee,” &c. (Pontific. de Confirm.)
(2.) After confirmation, he strikes the person slightly on the
cheek, that he may remember he is to suffer all injuries for the
name of Christ, with patience and courage. (Catech., n. 25.)
(3.) Then the person to be confirmed, setting his foot
upon the right foot of the godfather, (Pontific., ibid.,) is to
have his head bound with a clean head-band for some days
more or less, with reverence to the holy chrism; which done,
the band is to be preserved in the sacrarium, or other clean
place, till the following Ash-Wednesday, to be burnt to holy
ashes. (Pastorale.)
REPLY. Whether we consider the far-fetched significations
of these ceremonies or the virtue put in them, the abuse is
intolerable; as, for instance, that in consecration of the
chrism, the Bishop blows upon it, to signify the descent of the
Holy Ghost for the sanctification of it, (Bellarm. de Confirm.,
l. 2, c. 13, sec. Tertio habet, ) and that it hath a power of
sanctification as the instrument of God. (Ibid., sec. Quarta
caremonia.) So the Bishop prays in the consecration of it,
that God “in bestowing spiritual grace upon this ointment,
would pour out the fulness of sanctification, and that it may
be to all that are to be anointed with it, for the adoption of
sons by the Holy Spirit. Amen.” (Pontif Rom.)
OF THE EUCHARIST.
Q. 62. WHAT is the eucharist?
A. It is a sacrament wherein is truly, really, and substan
tially contained whole Christ, God-Man, body and blood,
118 RoMAN CATECHIsM, AND REPLY.
bones and nerves, (Catech. Rom., par. 2, c. 4, n. 33,) soul
and divinity, under the species or appearance of bread and
wine. (Concil. Trid, Sess. 13, de Real. Praes., c. 1; A Sum
of Christian Doctrine, printed 1686.)
Q. How do they attempt to prove this?
A. From the words of our Saviour,—“This is my body;”
which, say they, clearly demonstrate that the same body
which was born of the Virgin, and is now in heaven, is in
the sacrament. (Catech., par. 2, c. 4, n. 26.)
Q. 63. What becomes of the bread and wine after
consecration?
A. Upon consecration there is a conversion of the whole sub
stance of the bread into the substance of Christ's body; and of
the whole substance of the wine into the substance of Christ’s
blood; which conversion is usually called transubstantiation.
(Concil. Trid ibid., c. 4; Concil. Later., 4, can. 1.)
REPLY. (1.) No such change of the substance of the bread
into the substance of Christ's body, can be inferred from our
Saviour’s words, “This is my body;” (Matt. xxvi. 26;) for
it is not said, “This is turned into my body,” but, “This is
my body;” which, if it be taken literally, would rather prove
the substance of the bread to be his body. Therefore
Cardinal Cajetan acknowledges, it is nowhere said in the
Gospel that the bread is changed into the body of Christ; but
they have it from the authority of the Church. (Cajet. in
Aquin., par. 3, q.75, art. 1.)
(2.) It is farther evident that the words, are not to be taken
in their proper sense; for it is called bread as well after con
secration as before it. (1 Cor. x. 17; xi. 26–28.) So that
what was called his body was also bread at the same time.
(3) The mystical relation which the bread by consecration
has to Christ's body is sufficient to give it the name of his
body. For it is the usual way of Scripture, to call things of
a sacramental nature, by the names of those things they are
the figure of (Aug. Epist. 23.) So, circumcision is called
the covenant. (Gen. xvii. 13.) And the killing, dressing, and
eating the lamb, is called the passover. (Exodus xii. 11.)
And after the same manner is the bread in the sacrament
Christ’s body; that is, as circumcision was the covenant, and
the lamb the passover, by signification and representation, by
type and figure. And so the elements are called by the
Fathers, “the images,” (Orig. Dial. 3, Contr. Marcion,) “the
ROMAN CATECHISM, AND REPLY. 119
symbols,” (Euseb. Dem. Evang. l. 1, c. 1, et ult,) “the figure,”
(Aug. contr. Adimant., c. 12,) of Christ’s body and blood.
Q. 64. What is then that which is seen and tasted in the
eucharist?
A. The things seen and tasted are the accidents only of
bread and wine; there is the savour, colour, and quantity of
bread and wine, without any of their substance; but under
those accidents there is only the body and blood of Christ.
(Catech. Rom., n. 37, 44.)
REPLY. Our Saviour appealed to the senses of his
disciples: “Handle me, and see; for a spirit hath not flesh
and bones, as ye see me have.” (Luke xxiv. 39.) Take
away the certainty of sense, and there is no discerning a
body from a spirit; and grant transubstantiation, and we
take away the certainty of sense.
Q. 65. Is the body and blood of Christ broken when the
host is broken and divided ?
A. No, because Christ is impassible; (Abridgment of
Christ. Doctrine, c. 11, sec. Euchar.;) and, besides, there is
whole and entire Christ under either species or element,
under the species of bread, and under every particle of it;
under the species of wine, and under every drop of it. (Conc.
Trid, ibid., c. 3.)
REPLY. If every particle of the host is as much the whole
body of Christ, as the whole host is before it be divided, then
a whole may be divided into wholes; for, divide it and sub
divide it, it is still whole. Whole it is before the division, whole
it is in the division, and whole it is after it. Thus unreason
able, as well as false, is the doctrine of transubstantiation.
Q. 66. Do they administer the sacrament in both kinds of
bread and wine?
A. No; the people are permitted to receive it only in one
kind, and are denied the cup. (Trid, Sess. 21, c. 1.)
REPLY. It is acknowledged that our Saviour instituted and
delivered the sacrament in both kinds; (Concil. Constant.,
Sess. 13; Trid., Sess. 21, c. 1, 2;) and that it so continued
even in the Church of Rome for above one thousand years
after. (Consult. Cassandri., art. 22.) And yet with a non
obstante to both, they forbid the peoplc to drink of it; and
120 RoMAN CATECHISM, AND REPLY.
declare, whoever thinks it necessary to receive in both kinds,
is accursed. (Concil. Trid, ibid., can. 1.)
Q. 67. For what reason doth the Church of Rome deprive
the people of what our Lord is granted to have instituted ?
A. For just and weighty causes, (Con. Trid, ibid., c. 2,)
such as these: (1.) Lest the blood of Christ should be spilt
upon the ground. (2.) Lest the wine, by being kept for the
sick, should grow eager. (3.) Because many cannot bear
the taste or smell of wine. (4.) Because in many countries
there is such a scarcity of wine, as it is not to be had without
great charge and tedious journeys. (5.) To disprove those
that dehy whole Christ to be contained under each species.
(Catech. Rom, ibid., n. 66.)
REPLY. These are the “just and weighty causes” for their
overruling the plain precept of our Saviour: “Drink ye all
of this.” (Matt. xxvi. 27.) And yet whosoever shall say they
are not just and sufficient reasons, is accursed. (Concil.
Trid, ibid., can. 2.) As if it was sufficient to forbid wine
in the sacrament to all, because some few cannot bear the
taste or smell of it; and it was a just cause to deprive all
countries of it because some have not wine, or cannot obtain
it without difficulty
Q. 68. What is the mass?
A. In the sacrifice of the mass, the same Christ is contained,
and unbloodily offered, who bloodily offered himself upon the
altar of the cross. (Conc. Trid, Sess. 22, can. 1.)
Q. 69. Of what virtue is the sacrifice in the mass?
A. It is truly a propitiatory sacrifice, and is available, not
only for the sins, punishments, and satisfactions of the living,
but also for those of the souls in purgatory. (Ibid.)
Q. 70. Is this necessary to be believed?
A. Yes; and whosoever denies any of this, is accursed,
(Conc. Trid, Sess. 22, can. 1) and incapable of salvation.
(Bulla Pii IV.)
REPLY. The Scripture when it extols the perfection and
infinite value of Christ's sacrifice, doth infer from it, that there
needed not therefore any repetition of it: “He needeth not
daily, as those High Priests, to offer up sacrifice, &c.; for this
he did once, when he offered up himself.” (Hebrews vii. 27.)
But if the same Christ is offered in the mass as was on the
RoMAN CATECHISM, AND REPLY. 121
cross, and that unbloody sacrifice is alike propitiatory as the
bloody, there is then a repetition of the same sacrifice, and
he is daily offered. And what is it to say, the one was
bloody and the other is unbloody, when the unbloody is of
the same virtue, and is applied to the same end, as the
bloody? So that, as, if Christ had again been bloodily offered
up, there had been a repetition of that sacrifice; so there is a
repetition of it when he is offered up unbloodily. To have
then a perfect sacrifice daily repeated, and a sacrifice without
suffering, and a propitiation and remission without blood, are
alike irreconcilable to the Apostle. (Hebrews ix. 22, 25, &c.)
Q. 71. May the Priest communicate alone, though there
be none besides to communicate?
A. Yes; the Church of Rome doth approve and commend
solitary masses, and accounts them a communion; partly
because the people do spiritually communicate in it, and
partly because it is celebrated by a public Minister, not only
for himself, but also for the people. (Conc. Trid, ibid., cap. 6.)
REPLY. The Apostle calls the Lord’s supper a communion,
and saith, “All are partakers of that one bread.” (1 Cor. x.
16, 17.) And Cassander saith, “It cannot properly be a
communion unless many partake of it;” and adds from the
Council of Nants, that “it is absurd to say, Lift up your
hearts, when there is none communicates with the Priest.”
(Consult, art. 24, De Solit. Miss.) And yet the Council of
Trent declares, whosoever shall say such masses are unlawful,
and to be abrogated, is accursed. (Sess. 22, Can. 8.)
Q. 72. What honour is to be given to the consecrated host?
A. Latria, or the same sovereign worship which is due
only to God; (Concil. Trid, Sess. 13, cap. 5;) adore it;
(Missale Rom., cap. Missae;) pray to it. (Brev. Rom, Hym.
in F. Corp. Ch.) And whosoever holds it unlawful or
idolatrous so to do, is accursed. (Concil. Trid, ibid., Can. 6.)
REPLY. We freely own that Christ is to be adored in the
Lord’s supper; but that the elements are to be adored, we
deny. If Christ is not corporally present in the host, they
grant their adoration to be idolatry. (Coster. Enchir., c. 8, n.
10.) And that he is not corporally present anywhere but in
heaven, we are taught, Acts i. 11, iii. 21, whither he went,
and where he is to continue till his second coming to judgment.
122 ROMAN CATECHISM, AND REPLY
Q. 73. What are the ceremonies used in the mass?
A. The ceremonies in the mass respect either things,
actions, or words. Among the things, are garments, places,
time, vessels, cloths, incense, lights, &c. (Bellarmin. Doctr.
Trid. de Sacr. Miss.)
Q. 74. What are the garments used by the Priest in the
mass, and what is their signification?
A. (1.) The amice, or white veil, which he puts over his
head, signifies mystically, either the divinity of Christ
covered under his humanity, or the crown of thorns; and
morally, contemplation, or hope. In putting it on, he saith,
“Put on, O Lord, the helmet of salvation upon my head,
that I may overcome all diabolical temptations.”
(2.) The alb, or long white garment, signifies mystically,
the white robe put on our Saviour; and morally, faith and
innocency. In putting it on, he saith, “Make me white, O
Lord, and cleanse my heart, that, being whitened in the
blood of the Lamb, I may enjoy everlasting gladness.”
(3.) The girdle signifies mystically, the cords wherewith
our Saviour was bound; and morally, (being turned up on
both sides,) the two means to preserve chastity, namely,
fasting and prayer. When he puts it about him, he prays,
“Gird me, O Lord, with the girdle of purity, and quench in
my loins the humour of lust, that there may remain in me
the virtue of continency and chastity.” The like account is
given of the maniple, vestment, and stole, and of the divers
colours of the furniture used in the several seasons, in the
“Manual of the Poor Man’s Devotion,” chap. Of the Orna
ments of the Mass.
REPLY. The Council of Trent saith, that the ceremonies of
the mass, such as mystical benedictions, lights, incensings,
garments, &c., are from Apostolical tradition; (Sess. 22, c. 5;)
or, as others, were instituted by the Holy Ghost; (Bellar
minus, cap. de Sacr. Mis. ;) and that they serve for the
majesty of that sacrifice, and to raise the mind to the
contemplation of the divine things concealed in it; so none of
them are superfluous and vain. (Catech., par. 2, c. 4, n.81.)
But how shall we reconcile this to the numerous crossings
and sprinklings, used in the celebration of the mass? For
example: When the Priest is clothed with the garments
rehearsed before, he comes to the altar; and, standing on the
lowest step, just against the middle of it, he makes a
ROMAN CATECHISM, AND REPLY. 123
profound reverence to the altar and crucifix. Then he
ascends, and, having placed the books, &c., in order, he
descends to the lowest step, and, turning himself to it, with
his hands joined before his breast, and making a reverence to
the altar or crucifix, he begins the mass, standing upright,
and drawing with his right hand (his left hand laid on his
breast) the sign of the cross from his forehead to his breast.
Then he joins his hands before his breast; the Minister
standing on his left hand behind him, bowing, saith, Ad
Deum, &c. Then the Priest, with the Minister, say the
psalm, Judica me, with Gloria Patri, at which he is to bow
his head to the cross. Then he repeats the Introibo, making
with his right hand the sign of the cross from the forehead to
the breast. Then he bows his head and body to the altar,
and there he stands bowing till the Minister saith,
Misereatur. When he saith, Mea culpa, he smites thrice
upon his breast with the right hand; and thus the Missal
proceeds in its ceremonies in all the remaining parts of the
service.
OF PENANCE.
Q. 75. WHAT is the matter and form of the sacrament of
penance?
A. The matter is contrition, confession, and satisfaction.
The form is, “I absolve.” (Catech. Rom., par. 2, c. 5,
n. 14, 15.)
REPLY. We are told, that the matter of a sacrament is
somewhat sensible; (Catech. Rom., par. 2, c. 1, n. 11;) then
how is penance a sacrament, which has no such matter? For
where is the matter that is sensible in contrition? The
Council, to avoid this, call it, Quasi materia,—“A matter
after a sort.” (Concil. Trid, Sess. 14, can. 3.)
Q. 76. What is confession?
A. Confession is a particular discovery of all mortal sins to
the Priest, with all their circumstances that increase or
diminish the sin, as far as can be called to mind; (Concil.
Trid, Sess. 14, c. 5, & Catech., ibid., n. 48;) without which
neither forgiveness nor salvation is to be obtained. (Trid.,
ibid., Can. 6, 7; Catech., n. 44.)
REPLY. We grant confession to men to be in many cases
of use; public, in case of public scandal; private, to a
spiritual guide for disburdening of the conscience, and as an
124 RoMAN CATECHISM, AND REPLY.
help to repentance. But to make auricular confession, or
particular confession to a Priest, necessary to forgiveness and
salvation, when God has not so made it, is apparently to teach
for doctrine the commandment of men; and to make it neces
sary in all cases, is to make, of what may be a useful means, a
dangerous snare, both to the confessor, and those that confess.
Q. 77. Of what kind is the absolution which the Priest
grants upon confession?
A. The absolution is not only declarative, but judicial; and
the sentence pronounced by the Priest is as if pronounced by
the Judge himself; (Concil. Trid, ibid., c. 6, & Can. 9;) he
perfecting what God causes. (Catech., par. 2, 5, n. 17.)
REPLY. To pardon sin, and absolve the sinner judicially,
so as the conscience may rest firmly upon it, is a power
reserved by God to himself. So: “If we confess our sins, he
is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us
from all unrighteousness.” (1 John i. 9.) And therefore the
authority of the Priest is only ministerial, declarative, and
conditional. “Men show a ministry in the forgiveness of sins,
but do not exercise a right of power. They pray, but it is
God forgives,” saith St. Ambrose. (De Spir., l. 3, c. 19.)
Q. 78. What is the benefit of absolution?
A. Although a sinner is not so affected with such grief for
his sin, as may be sufficient to obtain pardon; yet, when he
has rightly confessed to a Priest, all his sins are pardoned,
and an entrance is opened into heaven. (Catech., ibid., n. 38.)
REPLY. The grief which is sufficient to obtain pardon, is
contrition; and so the grief which is not sufficient to obtain
pardon, must be attrition; and the meaning then is, that
attrition, with absolution, is as effectual as contrition.
Q. 79. What is satisfaction?
A. It is a compensation made to God, by prayer, fasting,
alms, &c., (Catech., ibid., n. 75,) for all sins committed against
him; (Bellarminus de Satisfact.; Bellarm. de Indulg., l. 1, c. 7,
sec. Quarta propositio;) so that the offender is thereupon
purged from the defilement of sin, and discharged from all
temporal punishments due to him, either here or in purga
tory. (Catech. Rom., ibid., n. 65, 66.)
Q. 80. How do these works become thus satisfactory?
RoMAN CATECHISM, AND REPLY. 125
A. They are meritorious and satisfactory, (Catech., ibid.,
n. 72, 73) as they are united to the satisfaction of Christ.
(Bellarm. de Formá Satisfact.; Bellarm. de Indulg., l. 1, c. 4,
sec. Respons, non est quidem.)
REPLY. The giving satisfaction to the Church in case of
scandal, and the imposing penances upon notorious offenders,
is an useful part of ecclesiastical discipline. But to make
that a satisfaction to God which is given to the Church; and
to make our works to satisfy, though but as an appendant to
the satisfaction of Christ, we can by no means allow. Not
the former, because it is derogatory to the justice of God;
not the latter, because it is derogatory to the merits of our
Saviour. For what can make a satisfaction to God, but the
obedience and suffering of his Son? Or what need is there
of another satisfaction after that of our Saviour? “By one
offering he hath perfected for ever them that are sanctified.”
(Heb. x. 14.)
THE SACRAMENT OF EXTREME UNCTION.
Q. 81. WHAT is the matter of the sacrament of extreme
unction ?
A. Oil of olive-berries, (Catech. Rom., par. 2, c. 6, n.5,)
consecrated by a Bishop; which aptly signifies the grace of
the Spirit with which the soul of the sick is invisibly anointed.
(Concil. Trid., Sess. 14, de Extr. Unct., c. 1.)
Q. 82. What is the form of it?
A. The form is, “By this holy anointing, God pardon
thee, by whatever thou hast offended by the fault of the
eyes, nose, or touch.” (Catech., ibid., n. 6.)
Q. 83. What are the parts anointed ?
A. The eyes, because of seeing; the ears, because of hear
ing; the mouth, because of tasting, or speech; the hands,
because of touching; the feet, because of motion; the reins,
because the seat of lust. (Catech., ibid., n. 10.)
Q. 84. When is this anointing administered ?
A. It is to be administered only when persons are supposed
to be near the point of death; (Concil. Trid, ibid., c. 3; Bel
larm. Extr. Unct, l. 1, c. 2, sec. Accedit;) whence it is called
extreme unction. (Catech., ibid., n. 2, 14.)
REPLY. We read, when the twelve Apostles were sent
forth, they “anointed with oil many that were sick, and
healed them;” (Mark vi. 13;) making use of that anointing,
126 RoMAN CATECHISM, AND REPLY.
not as a natural means, but as a mystical sign of the miraculous
cure to be wrought by the power of Christ. And as long as
this power continued in the Church, so long there was a
reason for continuing this rite. Accordingly, the Apostle
directs, “Is any sick? Let him call for the Elders of the
Church; and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil
in the name of the Lord: And the prayer of faith shall save
the sick.” (James v. 14, 15.) But when the power ceased,
there was no reason for the continuance of this sign. And
yet this ceremony of anointing is not only continued in the
Church of Rome without any pretence to the power, but the
nature and the use of it is wholly perverted from what it was in
apostolical times. For, (1.) This rite was then used in curing
the sick, but was not necessary to it; for we find them also
cured by imposition of hands, (Mark xvi. 18; Acts ix. 17,)
or by a word. (Acts ix. 34.) But in the Church of Rome it
is made absolutely necessary. (2.) In apostolical times it was
a mere rite; but in the Church of Rome it is made a sacra
ment, and whosoever saith it is a mere rite is accursed. (Concil.
Trid., Sess. 14, Can. 1.) (3.) It was used in apostolical times
properly for corporal maladies; but in the Church of Rome
properly for the soul, and but accidentally for the body.
(Bellarm. de Extr. Unct., l. 1, c. 2, sec. Probo igitur.) (4.)
It was used then for the recovery of the sick; but here it is
to be applied only to those that are judged to be past it.
OF THE SACRAMENT OF ORDERS.
Q. 85. Is ordination a sacrament?
A. It is truly and properly a sacrament, and doth confer
grace; and whoso denies this, is accursed. (Concil. Trid., Sess.
7, Can. 1, 23, cap. 3, Can. 3.)
REPLY. We account ordination to be of divine institution,
and that by it a ministerial commission is conveyed; but how
necessary soever this office is to the Church, and grace for the
exercise of it, yet as that grace is not promised to it, we cannot
admit it to be properly and truly a sacrament.
Q. 86. What are the several orders instituted for the service
of the Church?
A. The orders always received by the Catholic Church are
seven,-the greater and less: The greater are the Priest,
Deacon, and Sub-Deacon: The less are the Acolythus, who is
ROMAN CATECHISM, AND REPLY. 127
to carry the candle and assist the Sub-Deacon; the Exor
cist, who is to attend and pray over them that are possessed
with the devil; the Reader, and the Ostiarius, or door-keeper.
(Catech., par. 2, c. 7, n. 12, 15, &c.)
REPLY. We know of no authority there is for any order
under a Deacon, so as to anathematize them that do not
receive them. (Concil. Trid, ibid., Can. 2.) We know of
no authority for the forms used in the ordination of those
lower orders; as, when the Bishop admits any to that of
Exorcists, he reaches to them a book in which the exorcisms
are contained, and saith, “Receive, and commit to memory,
and take the power of laying on of hands upon the possessed,
or baptized, or catechumens.” (Catech., ibid., n. 17.)
We know of no authority for this kind of procedure, for
those forms of conjuration contained in those books, or for
the use of those rites therein prescribed, for exorcising
persons, houses, cattle, milk, butter, fruits, &c., infested with
the devil. (See the Pastorale Mechlin, and the Manual of
Exorcisms, Antwerp, 1626.)
oF THE SACRAMENT of MARRIAGE.
Q. 87. Is marriage truly and properly a sacrament?
A. Yes; and whosoever denies it so to be, is accursed.
(Concil. Trid, Sess. 24, Can. 1.)
REPLY. St. Austin saith, that signs, when applied to
religious things, are called sacraments. (Epist. 5.) And in
this large sense he calls the sign of the cross a sacrament; (in
Psalm. cxli.,) and others give the same name to washing the
feet, (Cypr. de Lotione Pedum,) and many other mysteries.
But then matrimony doth no more confer grace, than wash
ing the feet, or using the sign of the cross; which Bellar
mine, after all the virtue he ascribes to it, will not allow to
be properly and truly a sacrament. (De Imag., l. 2, c. 30,
sec. Dices ergo.)
Q. 88. May those that are in holy orders marry, or those
that are married be received into orders in the Church of
Rome?
A. No; these that are married may not be admitted;
(Concil. Later. 1, Can. 21, et Later. 2, Can. 6;) those that
are admitted may not marry; and those that, being admitted,
do marry, are to be separated.
128 ROMAN CATECHISM, AND REPLY.
Q. 89. If marriage is a sacrament, and so confers grace,
how comes it to be denied to those that are in holy orders?
(Catech. Rom., par. 2, c. 8, n. 17.)
A. Those in holy orders are the temple of God, and it is a
shameful thing that they should serve uncleanness. (Later.
Concil. 2, Can. 6.)
REPLY. The Apostle, on the contrary, saith, “Marriage is
honourable in all; ” (Heb. xiii. 4;) and gives a hard character
of that doctrine which forbids it. (1 Tim. iv. 1–3.) And
how lawful it was, the direction of the Apostle about it
(1 Tim. iii. 2) doth show. And how convenient it is, is
manifest from the mischiefs attending the prohibition of it
in the Romish Church, which wise men among themselves
have lamented. (Polyd. Virgil. de Invent, l. 3, c. 4, et
Cassander Consult, art. 23.)
THE CONCLUSION.
I MIGHT have added the Fifth Section about the juris
diction which the Church of Rome challenges over Princes,
and about their canonization of saints, their consecration
of Agnus Deis and beads, &c., and the use these and the like
are applied to. I might have further considered their notes
of a Church, and, showed how many of them are not true,
or, however, do not belong to the Church of Rome; but
that would be too large a subject to enter upon: And what
has been said will be sufficient to show how far that
Church hath erred from truth and reason. For if we set
their Councils, Missals, Breviaries, Rituals, and Catechisms
on one side, and Scripture and antiquity on the other, we
shall find their doctrines and practices as well opposite to
those as they are opposite to ours; and may be assured
that persons may sooner lose their eyes, than find there
such a primacy of St. Peter as they contend for, or their
Vicarship of the Pope, the invocation of saints, the worship
of images, service in an unknown tongue, transubstantiation,
purgatory, and the rest that we contend against. Scripture
and indubitable antiquity are the authority we appeal to ;
thither we refer our cause; and can heartily conclude with that
of Vincentius Lyrin, “That is to be held, which hath been
believed everywhere, always, and by all.” (Contr. Haer., c. 3.)
A SHORT METHOD
OF
CONVERTING ALL THE ROMAN CATHOLICS
IN THE KINGDOM OF IRELAND.
HUMBLY PROPOSED TO THE BISHOPS AND CLERGY
OF THAT KINGDOM.
•
1. It is a melancholy consideration to those who love the
Protestant interest, that so small a part of this nation is yet
reformed from Popery. They cannot observe without a very
sensible concern, that, in many parts of the kingdom, there
are still ten, nay, fifteen, perhaps upwards of twenty, Papists
to one Protestant. Nor can they see any prospect of its
being otherwise; few Papists being brought over to our
Church, notwithstanding all the methods which have been
used, while many Protestants are seduced from it.
2. Yet they cannot but earnestly desire, that all the Papists
were convinced of their errors. How much would this
redound to the glory of God, who willeth all to come to the
knowledge of his truth ! How greatly would it advantage
their own souls both in this world and in the world to come !
What an advantage would it be to the kingdom in general,
to be no longer divided against itself, to have that grand
cause of contention removed, and all its inhabitants of one
heart and one mind And how highly would it advance both
the honour and interest of our gracious Sovereign, to have all
his subjects cordially united together, thinking and speaking
the same thing !
3. Why then is not this desirable end pursued with a
vigour proportionable to its importance? Is it because we
despair of any success,—because we think it impossible to be
attained? But why should we imagine it to be impossible?
A common and plausible answer is, Because the Papists are
so bigoted to their Clergy; believing all that they affirm,
VOL. X. K
130 METHOD OF CONVERTING
however contrary both to Scripture and reason, and doing all
that they direct, whom they generally believe to be the
holiest and wisest of men.
4. Undoubtedly this is a considerable difficulty in the way:
And yet I cannot think it is unsurmountable. Still I conceive
it is possible to convince all the Papists, provided there are
proper instruments for the work. And what instruments are
so proper as the Clergy? not only as they are in every place,
distributed through the whole nation, and always ready on
the spot for the work; but likewise as it more immediately
belongs to them; as it is no inconsiderable branch of their
business who are peculiarly set apart to “watch over the
souls of men as they that must give account.”
5. But what way can the Clergy take, with any probability
of success? There is one way, and one only; one that will
(not probably, but) infallibly succeed. If this way is taken,
I am willing to stake my life upon the success of it. And it
is a plain, simple way, such as may be taken by any man,
though but of a small capacity. For it requires no peculiar
depth of understanding, no extraordinary height of learning;
but only a share of common sense, and a honest, upright heart.
6. It was observed that the grand difficulty of the work
lies, in the strong attachment of the Papists to their Clergy.
Here therefore we are to begin; we are to strike at the root;
and if this bigotry be but removed, whatever error or super
stition is built upon it will of course fall to the ground.
Now, this may be effectually done thus: The Papists them
selves allow that one set of Clergy were holier and wiser even
than their own, namely, the Apostles; they allow these both
to have lived and preached better than the present Clergy
even of the Roman Church.
Here, therefore, is the short and sure method. Let all the
Clergy of the Church of Ireland only live like the Apostles,
and preach like the Apostles, and the thing is done.
The Romans, on the same ground that they prefer th”
Apostles before their own Clergy, will then prefer ours before
them; and when they once do this, when we have carried
this point, when their attachment to our Clergy is stronger
than that to their own, they will be convinced by hundreds,
till there is not a Roman left in the kingdom of Ireland.
7. If it be asked, But how did the Apostles live and preach?
I answer, (not to descend to particulars) as to their inward
ROMAN CATHOLICS IN IRELAND. 131
life, if I may so speak, they “lived the life which is hid with
Christ in God.”
“They were crucified with Christ. Nevertheless they
lived; yet not they, but Christ lived in them.” So that each
of them could say, “The life which I now live in the flesh,”
even in this mortal body, “I live by faith in the Son of God,
who loved me, and gave himself for me.”
And this faith continually wrought by love, that “love of
God” which was “shed abroad in their hearts,” and was a peren
nial “fountain of water, springing up into everlasting life.”
By this loving faith their hearts were purified from anger,
from pride, from all vile affections, from the love of money, of
power, of pleasure, of ease, from the desire of the flesh, the
desire of the eye, and the pride of life; all their “affections
being set on things above, not on things of the earth.” In a
word, that “mind” was “in them which was in Christ Jesus.”
Let but this mind be in every Clergyman of our Church,
and Popery will vanish out of the kingdom.
8. As to the outward life of the Apostles, it was, in the
general, holy and unblamable in all things. Herein did they
exercise themselves day and night, with regard to every word
and action, “to have a conscience void of offence toward God
and man.” And their continual ground of “rejoicing was
this, the testimony of their conscience, that in simplicity and
godly sincerity they had had their conversation in the world.”
They were temperate in all things. They denied them
selves, and took up their cross daily. They “kept under
their bodies, and brought them into subjection,” even in the
midst of distresses and persecutions, “lest by any means,
after they had preached to others, they themselves should
have become castaways.”
They were, in every respect, burning and shining lights;
they went about doing good as they had opportunity, doing
good of every kind, and in every possible degree, to all men.
They abstained from all appearance of evil; they overcame
evil with good. If their enemy hungered, they fed him; if
he thirsted, they gave him drink; and, by patiently con
tinuing so to do, “heaped coals of fire upon his head,” and
melted his hardness into love.
In fine, it was their meat and drink to do the will of their
Father which was in heaven. And hence whatsoever they did,
whether in word or deed, they did all to the glory of God.
K 2
132 METHOD OF CONVERTING ROMAN CATHOLICS.
Let every Clergyman of our Church live thus, and in a
short time there will not be a Papist in the nation.
9. As to the preaching of the Apostles, with regard to the
matter of it, they preached Jesus, “the Author and Finisher
of our faith,” having “determined not to know anything,
save Jesus Christ and him crucified.” They preached Jesus
Christ as “of God made unto us wisdom, and righteousness,
and sanctification, and redemption.” They declared, “Other
foundation” of morality, religion, holiness, happiness, “can
no man lay.” All they spoke, either in public or private,
centred in this one point, “Jesus Christ, the same yesterday,
and to-day, and for ever.’’
More particularly, they preached that “a man is justified
by faith, without the works of the law;” that “to him that
worketh not, but believeth on Him that justifieth the ungodly,
his faith is counted to him for righteousness.”
10. They preached farther, that “except a man be born
again, he cannot see the kingdom of God;” except he be
“born from above,” born not only of water, but “of the Holy
Ghost;” and that “the ” present “kingdom of God is not
meats and drinks,” lies not in externals of any kind, “but
righteousness,” the image of God on the heart, “peace,” even
a peace that passeth all understanding, “and joy in the Holy
Ghost,” whereby they rejoiced with “joy unspeakable and
full of glory.”
They declared “that he that is ” thus “born of God doth
not commit sin;” that “he that is begotten of God, keepeth
himself, and the wicked one toucheth him not;” but that as
Christ who hath called him is holy, so is he holy in all manner
of conversation.
11. As to the manner of their preaching, they spoke with
authority, as speaking not their own word, but the word
of Him that sent them, and “by manifestation of the truth,
commending themselves to every man’s conscience in the
sight of God.” They were “not as many that cauponize the
word of God,” debase and adulterate it with foreign mixtures,
“but as of sincerity, but as of God, in the sight of God,
spake they in Christ.” They approved themselves the Minis
ters of God, “in much patience, in labours, in watchings, in
fastings; by pureness, by knowledge,” knowing all their flock
by name, all their circumstances, all their wants; “by long
suffering, never weary of well-doing, by kindness, by love
CHURCH of ENGLAND’s ADVANTAGE. 133
unfeigned; by the word of truth, by the power of God”
attending it, “by the armour of righteousness on the right
hand, and on the left.” Hence they were “instant in
season, out of season,” being never afraid of the faces of
men, never ashamed of Christ or of his words, even before
an adulterous and sinful generation. They went on unmoved
through “honour and dishonour,” through “evil report and
good report.” They regarded not father or mother, or wife
or children, or houses or lands, or ease or pleasure; but,
having this single end in view, to save their own souls, and
those that heard them, they “counted not their lives dear
unto themselves, so that they might” make full proof of their
ministry, so that they might “finish their course with joy,
and testify the gospel of the grace of God.”
Let all the Right Reverend the Bishops, and the Reverend
the Clergy, only walk by this rule,—let them thus live, and
thus testify, with one heart and one voice, the gospel of the
grace of God, and every Papist within these four seas will
soon acknowledge the truth as it is in Jesus.
THE ADVANTAGE
of THE
MEMBERS OF THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND,
OVER
THOSE OF THE CHURCII OF ROME.
I LAY this down as an undoubted truth:—The more the
doctrine of any Church agrees with the Scripture, the more
readily ought it to be received. And, on the other hand, the
more the doctrine of any Church differs from the Scripture,
the greater cause we have to doubt of it.
2. Now, it is a known principle of the Church of England,
that nothing is to be received as an article of faith, which is
134 CHURCH of ENGLAND’s ADVANTAGE
not read in the Holy Scripture, or to be inferred therefrom
by just and plain consequence. Hence it follows, that every
Christian has a right to know and read the Scripture, that he
may be sure what he hears from his teachers agrees with the
revealed word of God.
3. On the contrary, at the very beginning of the Reform
ation, the Church of Rome began to oppose this principle,
that all articles of faith must be provable from Scripture, (till
then received throughout the whole Christian world,) and to
add, if not prefer, to Holy Scripture, tradition, or the
doctrine of Fathers and Councils, with the decrees of Popes.
And soon after she determined in the Council of Trent,
“that the Old and New Testament, and the traditions of the
Church, ought to be received pari pietatis affectu ac
reverentia, “with equal piety and reverence;’” and that “it
suffices for laymen if they believe and practise what the
Church believes and requires, whether they understand the
ground of that doctrine and practice or not.” (Sess. 4.)
4. How plain is it that this remedy was found out because
they themselves observed that many doctrines, practices, and
ceremonies of their Church, not only could not be proved by
Scripture, but were flatly contradictory thereto?
As to the Fathers and Councils, we cannot but observe,
that in an hundred instances they contradict one another:
Consequently, they can no more be a rule of faith to us, than
the Papal decrees, which are not grounded on Scripture.
5. But the Church of Rome does not stop here. She not
only makes tradition of equal authority with the Scripture,
but also takes away the Scripture from the people, and
denies them the use of it.
For, soon after, her writers began to teach, yea, and assert
in entire volumes, “that the Scripture is obscure, and hard to
be understood; that it gives an handle to error and heresies;
that it is not a perfect or sufficient rule of life; that it ought
to be understood no otherwise than the Church, that is, the
Pope, explains it; that, consequently, the reading the
Scripture is of more hurt than use to the generality of
Christians.”
And, in fact, they not only publicly spoke against the
reading the Holy Scriptures, but in most countries absolutely
forbad the laity to read them, yea, and the Clergy too, till
they were ordered to preach.
OVER THAT OF ROME. 135
And if any did read it without a particular license, they
condemned and punished it as a great crime.
6. Thus the case stands to this day; yea, the late contro
versies in France make it undeniably plain, that the Church
of Rome does now labour, more earnestly than ever, to take
away the use of the Scriptures, even from those who have
hitherto enjoyed them.
Seeing, therefore, the Church of England contends for the
word of God, and the Church of Rome against it, it is easy
to discern on which side the advantage lies, with regard to
the grand principle of Christianity.
7. But that it may more clearly appear how widely the
Church of Rome differs from the Holy Scriptures, we have
set down a few instances wherein they flatly contradict the
written word of God.
Thus the Church of Rome, after acknowledging that the
Apostle terms concupiscence sin, yet scruples not to add
immediately, “The Catholic Church never understood that
this is truly and properly sin; and if any think the contrary,
let him be accursed.” (Conc. Trid, Sess. 5.)
Thus, although Christ himself says to all his disciples,
“Without me ye can do nothing,” yet the Church of Rome
condemns this very proposition as false and heretical:—“The
grace of Jesus Christ, the effectual principle of all good, is
necessary to every good work. Not only nothing good is done
without it, but nothing can be done.” (In the Bull Unigenitus.)
8. In like manner, the Church of Rome does not scruple
to impose upon the consciences of men, in the doctrine of the
mass, various traditions, that have no authority from holy
writ; and also takes away the cup in the Lord’s supper from
the laity, contrary to the plain institution of Christ, as well as
to the acknowledged custom of the primitive Church. Whence
it manifestly appears, that it is not the design of the Roman
Church to conform itself to the rule of the written word.
9. Again: The Church of Rome pronounces all those
accursed who say, “that baptism, confirmation, the Lord’s
supper, penance, extreme unction, orders, and matrimony,
are not sacraments instituted by Christ himself; or, that
there are more or fewer sacraments than seven; or, that any
of these is not truly and properly a sacrament; or, that they
do not confer grace barely by the work done.” (Conc. Trid,
Sess. 7.)
136 cHURCH or ENGLAND’s ADvANTAGE
Now, whereas these positions cannot be proved by
Scripture, and yet are enjoined to be believed under pain of
an anathema, it is hence also plain, that the Church of Rome
does purposely teach, and also maintain by open force, things
which partly are not founded on holy writ, partly are
contrary thereto.
10. As to their sacraments in particular, it is easy to show
that they require in each of them such doctrines and customs
to be received, as are wholly unsupported by, if not also
contrary to, the word of God.
For example: They teach, that in baptism “the right
intention of the Minister is so indispensably necessary, that
if it be wanting the baptized receives no benefit; that
confirmation was a true and proper sacrament from the
beginning; (ibid.;) that in the Lord’s supper the bread and
wine are converted into the natural body and blood of
Christ; that every particle of what is consecrated is no
longer bread, but the entire body of Christ; that it ought to
be worshipped and adored; and that the laity ought not to
receive the cup.” (Sess. 13, 22.)
In penance: “That a full confession of all our sins to the
Priest is absolutely necessary, or they cannot be pardoned;
that the penances imposed, (such as pilgrimages, whipping
themselves, and the like,) do meritoriously co-operate toward
the forgiveness of sins; that this forgiveness is obtained, not
through the merits of Christ alone, but also through the
merits and intercession of the Virgin Mary and other saints;
that extreme unction is a true and proper sacrament
instituted by Christ; that the oil blessed by the Bishop eases
the soul of the sick, and preserves him from the temptations
of the devil;” (Sess. 14;) “that ordination is a true and
proper sacrament, instituted by Christ; that an indelible
character is given thereby; that there were from the begin
ning those seven orders in the Church,-Priest, Deacon,
Sub-Deacon, acolythe, exorcist, reader, and door-keeper;
that the proper business of a Priest is, to consecrate and offer
the body and blood of Christ, and to remit or retain sins in
the chair of confession; that marriage is a true and proper
sacrament, instituted by Christ; that, nevertheless, marriage
may be dissolved by either party’s entering into a convent,
even against the consent of the other; that it is unlawful for
any of the Clergy to marry.” (Sess. 23.)
OVER THAT OF ROME. 137
11. Now, seeing all these doctrines are unsupported by, if
not also contrary to, the word of God, which yet the Church
of Rome requires to be received as true, and pronounces all
accursed who do not receive them, we cannot but conclude
that the Church of England enjoys an unspeakable advantage
over the Church of Rome, with respect to her doctrines,
which are wholly agreeable to, and founded on, the written
word of God.
12. The advantage of the Church of England over the
Church of Rome is equally great with regard to public worship.
For it is manifest that the public worship of the Roman
Church is wholly degenerated from the nature of Christ's
kingdom and the simplicity of the first Christians: That at
present it consists in magnificent buildings, altars, images,
ornaments, and habits; in splendid ceremonies; in processions
and pilgrimages, and prayers in an unknown tongue; and in
reciting the Creed, the Lord’s Prayer, and the Ave-Maria,
over and over, according to the number of their beads: That
they are not instructed to “worship God in spirit and in
truth,” as their loving and most beloved Father; and to praise
him, and comfort one another, with psalms, and hymns, and
spiritual songs: That their souls are not edified by sermons
and catechising out of the word of God, the Scriptures being
cited very sparingly in their sermons, and generally in a
strained and allegorical sense: That they are not permitted
to search the Scriptures at home, and seek food for their
souls therein: That the common people are by this means
purposely kept in the grossest ignorance and superstition.
13. It is manifest also that they are held in doubt as to the
salvation both of the living and the dead, by the doctrine of
purgatory; that hereby the minds of those who want to be
assured of the state of their souls, are disquieted and disturbed;
that pardon of sins, release from punishment due thereto,
and redemption from purgatory by masses and indulgences,
either for the living or dead, are daily sold for money.
14. It is no less manifest that their trust in Christ alone, the
one Mediator between God and man, is hindered so much the
more, the more the people are referred to the merits and inter
cession of the blessed Virgin, and other saints; the more they
are taught to adore their images and relics; to make vows to
them, and to implore their help in any trouble; yea, and to
place therein a very considerable part of their worship and
138 CHURCH of ENGLAND’s ADv ANTAGE
devotion; as well as in a bare outward observance of saints’
days, and other festivals of the Church, and in the abstaining
from some particular kinds of meat on what they call fast-days.
15. All these practices, wholly unsupported by Scripture,
the Church of Rome retains to this day; at the same time
that she rejects and pronounces accursed all (whether practices
or doctrines) that make against her, be they ever so plainly
contained in, and grounded on, the word of God.
Our Reformers seeing this, judged it needful to inquire
whether it could be proved by holy writ that the Bishop of
Rome is the successor of St. Peter; that he is Christ's Vicar
upon earth, and the visible head of the Church; that he has
a right of interpreting the word of God according to his own
pleasure; to introduce and prohibit doctrines, besides and
against the written word; to license things which the Scrip
ture forbids; to exercise a spiritual, and in many cases a
secular, power over all Christians,—Kings and Emperors not
excepted; to anathematize all that oppose his will, depose
Princes, and absolve subjects from their allegiance; to
pronounce heretics, to curse, kill, torture, and burn alive, all
who do not submit to him in every point.
16. Some of the reasons they had to doubt of these things
were those which follow:—
That neither St. Peter, nor any of the ancient Bishops, had
the same doctrine or manner of governing the Church which
the Bishop of Rome now has, as is clear both from the
Epistles of St. Peter, from the Acts of the Apostles, and the
ancient ecclesiastical history; that Christ alone “is made of
God Head over all things to the Church,” (Eph. i. 22; iv.
15; Col. i. 18,) who is “with them always, even to the end
of the world;” that the kingdom of Christ, being not of this
world, bears no resemblance to the hierarchy and monarchy
of the Papal kingdom; that the possessing the See of Rome
no more proves the Pope to be the successor of St. Peter,
than the possessing the city of Constantinople proves the
Great Turk to be the successor of Constantine the Great;
that if the Pope were the Vicar of Christ, (which is not yet
proved,) still he would have no authority to change or
abrogate the laws of his Lord and King; much less to make
laws just contrary to them, or to exempt any from obeying
the laws of Christ; that attempts of this kind denote an
adversary, rather than a faithful and upright Vicar, of Christ.
OVER THAT OF ROME. 139
17. They doubt of these things the more, because the
primitive Church knew of no such thing as an universal
head; because no Bishop was acknowledged as such at the
time of the Council of Nice; because Gregory the Great
declared, he should account any man to be antichrist who
called himself by such a title; because it is apparent, that
Boniface III., the next Pope but one to him, about the year
606, was the first to whom the title of universal Bishop was
given, as a reward for his absolving the tyrant Phocas, after
he had murdered his master, the Emperor Mauritius, with
his Empress, and eight children; because the succeeding
Popes acquired one part of their power after another, by
various methods, either of fraud or force; because many of
them have been notoriously wicked men, and encouragers of
all manner of wickedness; notwithstanding all which, men
are required to believe that they are all enlightened by the
Holy Ghost, in so extraordinary a manner as to be rendered
infallible; although one Pope is continually contradicting
another, and reversing the decrees which his predecessors had
most solemnly established.
18. When the Romanists are desired to prove by
Scripture, that the Pope is the head of the Church, they urge,
that Christ said to St. Peter, (1) “I will give unto thee the
keys of the kingdom of heaven.” (2.) “Feed my lambs;
feed my sheep.” Therefore we answer, These texts by no
means prove that Christ made St. Peter himself his Vicar;
much less that he gave that dominion to the Pope, which he
now usurps over the consciences of men. And hence we are
the more clearly convinced, that the papal power is not of
divine original; and that we have great cause to bless God,
whom the Pope has excluded from his communion, and
thereby restored to that unshaken liberty of conscience
wherein, by the grace of God, we shall always stand.
19. In this liberty every member of our Church, if he gives
himself up to the guidance of God's Holy Spirit, may learn
the foundation of his faith from the written word of God;
may read and meditate therein day and night; may devoutly
pray in the Spirit of adoption, like the holy men of ancient
times; may comfort and quicken himself and others, with
psalms, and hymns, and spiritual songs; may enjoy all the
ordinances of Christ, according to his own institution; may
be assured of the remission of his sins, and of his justification
140 POPERY CALMLY CONSIDERED.
through faith in Christ, the Spirit of God witnessing with his
spirit that he is a child of God; may study to have a con
science void of offence, both toward God and toward man:
He may freely enjoy every blessing which God hath bestowed
upon our own Church; and may make advantage of whatever
good the providence of God has still preserved in the Church
of Rome: He may cheerfully look for a happy death, and a
blessed eternity; and at length, by resting on Christ alone,
and patiently partaking of his sufferings, he may, with certain
hope of a resurrection to eternal life, without any fear either
of purgatory or hell, resign his spirit into the hand of God,
and so be ever with the Lord.
POP E R Y C A L MLY CONSIDE RED.
TO THE READER.
IN the following Tract, I propose, First, to lay down and examine the chief
doctrines of the Church of Rome: Secondly, to show the natural tendency
of a few of those doctrines; and that with all the plainness and all the
calmness I can.
SECTION I.
oF THE CHURCH, AND THE RULE of FAITH.
1. THE Papists judge it necessary to salvation, to be
subject to the Pope, as the one visible head of the Church.
But we read in Scripture, that Christ is the Head of the
Church, “from whom the whole body is fitly joined together.”
(Col. ii. 19.) The Scripture does not mention any visible
head of the Church; much less does it mention the Pope as
such; and least of all does it say, that it is necessary to
salvation to be subject to him.
2. The Papists say, The Pope is Christ's Vicar, St. Peter's
successor, and has the supreme power on earth over the whole
Church.
We answer, Christ gave no such power to St. Peter him
self. He gave no Apostle pre-eminence over the rest. Yea,
Pop ERY CALMLY CONSIDERED. 141
St. Paul was so far from acknowledging St. Peter's supremacy,
that he withstood him to the face, (Gal. ii. 11) and asserted
himself “not to be behind the chief of the Apostles.”
Neither is it certain, that St. Peter was Bishop of Rome;
no, nor that he ever was there.
But they say, “Is not Rome the mother, and therefore the
mistress, of all Churches?”
We answer, No. “The word of the Lord went forth from
Jerusalem.” There the Church began. She, therefore, not
the Church of Rome, is the mother of all Churches.
The Church of Rome, therefore, has no right to require
any person to believe what she teaches on her sole authority.
3. St. Paul says, “All Scripture is given by inspiration of
God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction,
for instruction in righteousness, that the man of God may be
perfect, throughly furnished unto all good works.”
The Scripture, therefore, being delivered by men divinely
inspired, is a rule sufficient of itself: So it neither needs, nor
is capable of, any farther addition.
Yet the Papists add tradition to Scripture, and require it to
be received with equal veneration. By traditions, they mean,
“such points of faith and practice as have been delivered
down in the Church from hand to hand without writing.”
And for many of these, they have no more Scripture to show,
than the Pharisees had for their traditions.
4. The Church of Rome not only adds tradition to Scrip
ture, but several entire books; namely, Tobit and Judith,
the Book of Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, Baruch, the two books
of Maccabees, and a new part of Esther and of Daniel;
“which whole books,” says the Church of Rome, “whoever
rejects, let him be accursed.”
We answer, We cannot but reject them. We dare not
receive them as part of the Holy Scriptures. For none of
these books were received as such by the Jewish Church, “to
whom were committed the oracles of God:” (Rom. iii. 2:)
Neither by the ancient Christian Church, as appears from the
60th Canon of the Council of Laodicea; wherein is a catalogue
of the books of Scriptures, without any mention of these.
5. As the Church of Rome, on the one hand, adds to the
Scripture, so, on the other hand, she forbids the people to read
them. Yea, they are forbid to read so much as a summary
or historical compendium of them in their own tongue.
142 POPERY CALMLY CONSIDERED.
Nothing can be more inexcusable than this. Even under
the law, the people had the Scriptures in a tongue vulgarly
known; and they were not only permitted, but required, to
read them; yea, to be constantly conversant therein. (Deut.
vi. 6, &c.) Agreeable to this, our Lord commands to search
the Scriptures; and St. Paul directs, that his Epistle be read
in all the Churches. (1 Thess. v. 27.) Certainly this Epistle
was wrote in a tongue which all of them understood.
But they say, “If people in general were to read the
Bible, it would do them more harm than good.” Is it any
honour to the Bible to speak thus? But supposing some
did abuse it, is this any sufficient reason for forbidding others
to use it? Surely no. Even in the days of the Apostles,
there were some “unstable and ignorant men,” who wrested
both St. Paul's Epistles, and the other Scriptures, “to their
own destruction.” But did any of the Apostles, on this
account, forbid other Christians to read them? You know
they did not: They only cautioned them not to be “led
away by the error of the wicked.” And certainly the way to
prevent this is, not to keep the Scriptures from them; (for
“they were written for our learning;”) but to exhort all to
the diligent perusal of them, lest they should “err, not
knowing the Scriptures.”
6. “But seeing the Scripture may be misunderstood, how
are we to judge of the sense of it? How can we know the
sense of any scripture, but from the sense of the Church 7 °
We answer, (1.) The Church of Rome is no more the
Church in general, than the Church of England is. It is
only one particular branch of the catholic or universal
Church of Christ, which is the whole body of believers in
Christ, scattered over the whole earth. (2.) We therefore
see no reason to refer any matter in dispute to the Church
of Rome, more than any other Church; especially as we
know, neither the Bishop nor the Church of Rome is any
more infallible than ourselves. (3.) In all cases, the Church
is to be judged by the Scripture, not the Scripture by the
Church. And Scripture is the best expounder of Scripture.
The best way, therefore, to understand it, is carefully to
compare Scripture with Scripture, and thereby learn the true
meaning of it.
POPERY CALMLY CONSIDERED. 143
SECTION II.
OF REPENTANCE AND OBEDIENCE.
1. THE Church of Rome teaches, that “the deepest
repentance or contrition avails nothing without confession to
a Priest; but that, with this, attrition, or the fear of hell, is
sufficient to reconcile us to God.”
This is very dangerously wrong, and flatly contrary to Scrip
ture; for the Scripture says, “A broken and contrite heart,
thou, O God, wilt not despise.” (Psalm li. 17.) And the same
texts which make contrition sufficient without confession, show
that attrition even with it is insufficient. Now, as the former
doctrine, of the insufficiency of contrition without confession,
makes that necessary which God has not made necessary; so
the latter, of the sufficiency of attrition with confession,
makes that unnecessary which God has made necessary.
2. The Church of Rome teaches, that “good works truly
merit eternal life.”
This is flatly contrary to what our Saviour teaches: “When
ye have done all those things that are commanded you, say,
We are unprofitable servants: We have done that which was
our duty to do.” (Luke xvii. 10.) A command to do it,
grace to obey that command, “and a far more exceeding and
eternal weight of glory,” must for ever cut off all pretence of
merit from all human obedience.
3. That a man may truly and properly merit hell, we
grant; although he never can merit heaven. But if he does
merit hell, yet, according to the doctrine of the Church of
Rome, he need never go there. For “the Church has power
to grant him an indulgence, which remits both the fault and
the punishment.”
Some of these indulgences extend only to so many days;
some, to so many weeks; but others extend to a man’s whole
life; and this is called a plenary indulgence.
These indulgences are to be obtained by going pilgrimages,
by reciting certain prayers, or (which is abundantly the most
common way) by paying the stated price of it.
Now, can anything under heaven be imagined more horrid,
more execrable than this? Is not this a manifest prostitution of
religion to the basest purposes? Can any possible method be
contrived, to make sin more cheap and easy % Even the Popish
144 POPERY CALMLY CONSIDERED.
Council of Trent acknowledged this abuse, and condemned it
in strong terms; but they did not in any degree remove the
abuse which they acknowledged. Nay, two of the Popcs under
whom the Council sat, Pope Paul III., and Julius III., pro
ceeded in the same course with their predecessors, or rather
exceeded them; for they granted to such of the Fraternity
of the Holy Altar as visited the Church of St. Hilary of
Chartres during the six weeks of Lent, seven hundred and
seventy-five thousand seven hundred years of pardon.
4. This miserable doctrine of indulgences is founded upon
another bad doctrine, that of works of supererogation; for
the Church of Rome teaches, that there is “an overplus of
merit in the saints; and that this is a treasure committed to
the Church’s custody, to be disposed as she sees meet.”
But this doctrine is utterly irreconcilable with the follow
ing scriptures —“The sufferings of the present time are not
worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be revealed
in us;” (Rom. viii. 18;) and “Every one of us shall give an
account of himself to God.” (Rom. xiv. 12.) For if there be
no comparison betwixt the reward and the sufferings, then
no one has merit to transfer to another; and if every one
must give an account of himself to God, then no one can be
saved by the merit of another. But suppose there were a
superabundance of merits in the saints, yet we have no need
of them, seeing there is such an infinite value in what Christ
hath done and suffered for us; seeing He alone hath “by
one offering perfected for ever them that are sanctified.”
(Heb. x. 14.)
5. But where do the souls of those go after death, who die
in a state of grace, but yet are not sufficiently purged from
sin to enter into heaven?
The Church of Rome says, “They go to purgatory, a
purging fire near hell, where they continue till they are
purged from all their sins, and so made meet for heaven.”
Nay, that those who die in a state of grace, go into a place
of torment, in order to be purged in the other world, is utterly
gontrary to Scripture. Our Lord said to the penitent thief
upon the cross, “To-day shalt thou be with me in paradise.”
Now, if a purgation in another world were necessary for any,
he that did not repent and believe till the last hour of his life
might well be supposed to need it; and consequently ought
to have been sent to purgatory, not to paradise.
POPERY CALMLY CONSIDERED. 145
6. Very near akin to that of purgatory, is the doctrine of
Limbus Patrum. For the Church of Rome teaches, that
“before the death and resurrection of Christ, the souls of
good men departed were detained in a certain place, called
Limbus Patrum, which is the uppermost part of hell.” “The
lowermost,” they say, “is the place of the damned; next
above this is purgatory; next to that, Limbus Infantum, or
the place where the souls of infants are.”
It might suffice to say, there is not one word of all this in
Scripture. But there is much against it. We read that
Elijah was taken up into heaven; (2 Kings ii. 11;) and he
and Moses “appeared in glory.” (Luke ix. 31.) And
Abraham is represented as in paradise, (Luke xvi. 22,) the
blessed abode of good men in the other world. Therefore,
none of these were in the Limbus Patrum. Consequently, if
the Bible is true, there is no such place.
SECTION III.
OF DIVINE WORSHIP.
1. THE service of the Roman Church consists of prayers
to God, angels, and saints; of Lessons, and of Confessions
of Faith.
All their service is everywhere performed in the Latin
tongue, which is nowhere vulgarly understood. Yea, it is
required; and a curse is denounced against all those who
say it ought to be performed in the vulgar tongue.
This irrational and unscriptural practice destroys the great
end of public worship. The end of this is, the honour of God
in the edification of the Church. The means to this end is,
to have the service so performed as may inform the mind and
increase devotion. But this cannot be done by that service
which is performed in an unknown tongue.
What St. Paul judged of this is clear from his own words:
“If I know not the meaning of the voice,” (of him that
speaks in a public assembly,) “he that speaketh shall be a
barbarian to me.” (1 Cor. xiv. 11.) Again: “If thou shalt
bless by the Spirit,” (by the gift of an unknown tongue,)
“how shall the unlearned say Amen?” (Verse 16.) How
can the people be profited by the Lessons, answer at the
VOL. X. L
146 POPERY CALMLY CONSIDERED.
Responses, be devout in their Prayers, confess their faith in
the Creeds, when they do not understand what is read,
prayed, and confessed? It is manifest, then, that the having
any part of divine worship in an unknown tongue is as flatly
contrary to the word of God as it is to reason.
2. From the manner of worship in the Church of Rome,
proceed we to the objects of it. Now, the Romanists worship,
besides angels, the Virgin Mary and other saints. They
teach that angels, in particular, are to be “worshipped,
invoked, and prayed to.” And they have Litanies and other
Prayers composed for that purpose.
In flat opposition to all this, the words of our Saviour are,
“Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt
thou serve.” To evade this, they say, “The worship we give
to angels is not the same kind with that which we give to
God.” Vain words ! What kind of worship is peculiar to
God, if prayer is not? Surely God alone can receive all our
prayers, and give what we pray for. We honour the angels,
as they are God’s Ministers; but we dare not worship or
pray to them; it is what they themselves refuse and abhor.
So, when St. John “fell down at the feet of the angel to
worship him, he said, See thou do it not: I am thy fellow
servant: Worship God.” (Rev. xix. 10.)
3. The Romanists also worship saints. They pray to them
as their intercessors; they confess their sins to them; they
offer incense and make vows to them. Yea, they venerate
their very images and relics.
Now, all this is directly contrary to Scripture. And, First,
the worshipping them as intercessors. For, as “there is but
one God to us, though there are gods many, and lords many;”
so, according to Scripture, there is but one Intercessor or
Mediator to us. (1 Cor. viii. 5, 6.) And suppose the angels
or saints intercede for us in heaven; yet may we no more
worship them, than, because “there are gods many on
earth,” we may worship them as we do the true God.
The Romanists allow, “There is only one Mediator of
redemption;” but say, “There are many mediators of inter
cession.” We answer, The Scripture knows no difference
between a mediator of intercession and of redemption. He
alone “who died and rose again” for us, makes intercession
for us at the right hand of God. And he alone has a right
to our prayers; nor dare we address them to any other.
POPERY CALMLY CONSIDERED. 147
4. The worship which the Romanists give to the Virgin
Mary, is beyond what they give either to angels or other
saints. In one of their public offices, they say, “Command
thy Son by the right of a mother.” They pray to her to
“loose the bands of the guilty, to bring light to the blind, to
make them mild and chaste, and to cause their hearts to
burn in love to Christ.”
Such worship as this cannot be given to any creature,
without gross, palpable idolatry. We honour the blessed
Virgin as the mother of the Holy Jesus, and as a person of
eminent piety: But we dare not give worship to her; for it
belongs to God alone.
Meantime, we cannot but wonder at the application which
the Church of Rome continually makes to her, of whose acts
on earth the Scripture so sparingly speaks. And it says
nothing of what they so pompously celebrate, her assumption
into heaven, or of her exaltation to a throne above angels or
archangels. It says nothing of her being “the mother of
grace and mercy, the Queen of the gate of heaven,” or of her
“power to destroy all heresies,” and bring “all things to all.”
5. The Romanists pay a regard to the relics of the saints
also; which is a kind of worship. By relics, they mean the
bodies of the saints, or any remains of them, or particular
things belonging or relating to them when they were alive;
as an arm or thigh, bones or ashes; or the place where, or
the things by which, they suffered. They venerate these, in
order to obtain the help of the saints. And they believe,
“by these many benefits are conferred on mankind; that by
these relics of the saints, the sick have been cured, the dead
raised, and devils cast out.”
We read of good King Hezekiah, that “he brake in pieces
the brazen serpent which Moses had made.” (2 Kings xviii.4.)
And the reason was, because the children of Israel burnt
incense to it. By looking up to this, the people bitten by the
fiery serpents had been healed. And it was preserved from
generation to generation, as a memorial of that divine opera
tion. Yet, when it was abused to idolatry, he ordered it to
be broke in pieces. And were these true relics of the saints,
and did they truly work these miracles, yet that would be no
sufficient cause for the worship that is given them. Rather,
this worship would be a good reason, according to Hezekiah’s
practice, for giving them a decent interment.
L 2
148 POPERY CALMLY CONSIDERED.
6. Let us next consider what reverence the Church of
Rome requires to be given to images and pictures. She
requires “to kiss them, to uncover the head, to fall down
before them, and use all such postures of worship as they
would do to the persons represented, if present.” And,
accordingly, “the Priest is to direct the people to them, that
they may be worshipped.” They say, indeed, that, in falling
down before the image, they “worship the saint or angel
whom it represents.” We answer, (1.) We are absolutely
forbidden in Scripture to worship saints or angels themselves.
(2.) We are expressly forbidden “to fall down and worship
any image or likeness of anything in heaven or earth,”
whomsoever it may represent. This, therefore, is flat
idolatry, directly contrary to the commandment of God.
7. Such, likewise, without all possibility of evasion, is the
worship they pay to the cross. They pray that God may
make the wood of the cross to “be the stability of faith, an
increase of good works, the redemption of souls.” They use
all expressions of outward adoration, as kissing, and falling
down before it. They pray directly to it, to “increase grace
in the ungodly, and blot out the sins of the guilty.” Yea,
they give latria to it. And this, they themselves say, “is
the sovereign worship that is due only to God.”
But indeed they have no authority of Scripture for their
distinction between latria and dulia; the former of which
they say is due to God alone, the latter that which is due to
saints. But here they have forgotten their own distinction.
For although they own latria is due only to God, yet they do
in fact give it to the cross. This then, by their own account,
is flat idolatry.
8. And so it is to represent the blessed Trinity by pictures
and images, and to worship them. Yet these are made in
every Romish country, and recommended to the people to be
worshipped; although there is nothing more expressly for
bidden in Scripture, than to make any image or representation
of God. God himself never appeared in any bodily shape.
The representation of “the Ancient of days,” mentioned in
Daniel, was a mere prophetical figure; and did no more
literally belong to God, than the eyes or ears that are
ascribed to him in Scripture.
POPERY CALMILY CONSIDERED. 149
SECTION IV.
t OF THE SACRAMENTS.
1. THE Church of Rome says, “A sacrament is a sensible
thing, instituted by God himself, as a sign and a means
of grace.
“The sacraments are seven: Baptism, confirmation, the
Lord’s supper, penance, extreme unction, orders, and marriage.
“The parts of a sacrament are, the matter, and the form,
or words of consecration. So in baptism, the matter is
water; the form, ‘I baptize thee,’” &c.
On this we remark, Peter Lombard lived about one
thousand one hundred and forty years after Christ. And he
was the first that ever determined the sacraments to be seven.
St. Austin (a greater than he) positively affirms, “that there
are but two of divine institution.”
Again: To say that a sacrament consists of matter and
form, and yet either has no form, as confirmation and extreme
unction, (neither of which is ever pretended to have any form
of words, instituted by God himself) or has neither matter
nor form, as penance or marriage, is to make them sacra
ments and no sacraments. For they do not answer that
definition of a sacrament which themselves have given.
2. However, they teach that “all these seven confer grace
ex opere operato, by the work itself, on all such as do not put
an obstruction.” Nay, it is not enough that we do not put
an obstruction. In order to our receiving grace, there is also
required previous instruction, true repentance, and a degree
of faith; and even then the grace does not spring merely ex
opere operato: It does not proceed from the mere elements,
or the words spoken; but from the blessing of God, in
consequence of his promise to such as are qualified for it.
Equally erroneous is that doctrine of the Church of Rome,
that, “in order to the validity of any sacrament, it is
absolutely necessary the person who administers it should do
it with an holy intention.” For it follows, that, wherever
there is not this intention, the sacrament is null and void.
And so there is no certainty whether the Priest, so called, be
a real Priest; for who knows the intention of him that
ordained him? And if he be not, all his ministrations are of
150 POPERY CALMLY CONSIDERED.
course null and void. But if he be, can I be sure that his
intention was holy, in administering the baptism or the
Lord’s supper? And if it was not, they are no sacraments
at all, and all our attendance on them is lost labour.
3. So much for the sacraments in general: Let us now
proceed to particulars:—
“Baptism,” say the Romanists, “may, in case of necessity,
be administered by women, yea, by Jews, infidels, or
heretics.” No; our Lord gave this commission only to the
Apostles, and their successors in the ministry.
The ceremonies which the Romanists use in baptism are
these :
Before baptism, (1.) Chrism; that is, oil mixed with water
is to be consecrated. (2.) Exorcism; that is, the Priest is to
blow in the face of the child, saying, “Go out of him,
Satan!” (3.) He crosses the forehead, eyes, breast, and
several other parts of the body. (4.) He puts exorcised salt
into his mouth, saying, “Take the salt of wisdom.” (5.) He
puts spittle in the palm of his left hand, puts the fore-finger
of his right hand into it, and anoints the child’s nose and
ears therewith, who is then brought to the water.
After baptism, First, he anoints the top of the child's head
with chrism, as a token of salvation: Secondly, he puts on
him a white garment, in token of his innocence: And,
Thirdly, he puts a lighted candle into his hand, in token of
the light of faith.
Now, what can any man of understanding say in defence
of these idle ceremonies, utterly unknown in the primitive
Church, as well as unsupported by Scripture? Do they add
dignity to the ordinance of God? Do they not rather make
it contemptible?
4. The matter of confirmation is the chrism; which is an
ointment consecrated by the Bishop. The form is the words
he uses in crossing the forehead with the chrism; namely,
“I sign thee with the sign of the cross, and confirm thee
with the chrism of salvation, in the name of the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost.”
Then the person confirmed, setting his right foot on the
right foot of his godfather, is to have his head bound with a
clean head-band; which, after some days, is to be taken off,
and reserved till the next Ash-Wednesday, to be then burnt
to holy ashes.
POPERY CALMLY CONSIDERED. 151
The Roman Catechism says, “Sacraments cannot be
instituted by any beside God.” But it must be allowed,
Christ did not institute confirmation; therefore it is no
sacrament at all.
5. We come now to one of the grand doctrines of the
Church of Rome,—that which regards the Lord’s supper.
This, therefore, we would wish to consider with the deepest
attention. They say, “In the Lord’s supper whole Christ is
really, truly, and substantially contained; God-Man, body
and blood, bones and nerves, under the appearance of bread
and wine.”
They attempt to prove it thus: “Our Lord himself says,
‘This is my body. Therefore, upon consecration there is a
conversion of the whole substance of the bread into the
whole substance of Christ's body, and of the whole substance
of the wine into the substance of his blood; and this we term
transubstantiation.
“Yet we must not suppose that Christ is broken, when
the host, or, consecrated bread, is broken; because there is
whole and entire Christ, under the species of every particle
of bread, and under the species of every drop of wine.”
We answer: No such change of the bread into the body
of Christ can be inferred from his words, “This is my body.”
For it is not said, “This is changed into my body,” but,
“This is my body;” which, if it were to be taken literally,
would rather prove the substance of the bread to be his body.
But that they are not to be taken literally is manifest from
the words of St. Paul, who calls it bread, not only before,
but likewise after, the consecration. (1 Cor. x. 17; xi. 26–
28.) Here we see, that what was called his body, was bread
at the same time. And accordingly these elements are called
by the Fathers, “the images, the symbols, the figure, of
Christ's body and blood.”
Scripture and antiquity, then, are flatly against transub
stantiation. And so are our very senses. Now, our Lord
himself appealed to the senses of his disciples: “Handle me
and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me
have.” (Luke xxiv. 39.) Take away the testimony of our
senses, and there is no discerning a body from a spirit. But
if we believe transubstantiation, we take away the testimony
of all our senses.
And we give up our reason too: For if every particle of the
152 POPERY CALMLY CONSIDERED.
host is as much the whole body of Christ as the whole host is
before it is divided, then a whole may be divided, not into
parts, but into wholes. For divide and subdivide it over and
over, and it is whole still ! It is whole before the division,
whole in the division, whole after the division | Such
nonsense, absurdity, and self-contradiction all over is the
doctrine of transubstantiation
6. An evil practice attending this evil doctrine is, the
depriving the laity of the cup in the Lord’s supper. It is
acknowledged by all, that our Lord instituted and delivered
this sacrament in both kinds; giving the wine as well as the
bread to all that partook of it; and that it continued to be
so delivered in the Church of Rome for above a thousand
years. And yet, notwithstanding this, the Church of Rome
now forbids the people to drink of the cup ! A more insolent
and barefaced corruption cannot easily be conceived !
Another evil practice in the Church of Rome, utterly
unheard of in the ancient Church, is, that when there is
none to receive the Lord’s supper, the Priest communicates
alone. (Indeed it is not properly to communicate, when one
only receives it.) This likewise is an absolute innovation in
the Church of God.
But the greatest abuse of all in the Lord’s supper is, the
worshipping the consecrated bread. And this the Church
of Rome not only practises, but positively enjoins. These
are her words: “The same sovereign worship which is due
to God, is due to the host. Adore it; pray to it. And
whosoever holds it unlawful so to do, let him be accursed.”
The Romanists themselves grant, that if Christ is not
corporally present in the Lord’s supper, this is idolatry.
And that he is not corporally present anywhere but in
heaven, we learn from Acts i. 11; iii. 21. Thither he went,
and there he will continue, “till the time of the restitution
of all things.”
7. Consider we now what the Romanists hold, concerning
the sacrament of penance.
“The matter of the sacrament of penance is, contrition,
confession, and satisfaction; the form, “I absolve thee.’”
We object to this: You say, “The matter of a sacrament
is something sensible,” perceivable by our senses. But if so,
penance is not a sacrament. For surely contrition is not
something perceivable by the outward senses 1
POPERY CALMLY CONSIDERED. 153
Again: They say, “Confession is a particular discovery of
all mortal sins to a Priest, with all their circumstances, as far
as they can be called to mind; without which there can be
no forgiveness or salvation.”
We answer: Although it is often of use to confess our sins
to a spiritual guide, yet to make confessing to a Priest
necessary to forgiveness and salvation, is “teaching for doc
trines the commandment of men.” And to make it necessary
in all cases is to lay a dangerous snare both for the Confessor
and the confessed.
They go on : “The sentence pronounced by the Priest in
absolution, is pronounced by the Judge himself. All the sins
of the sinner are thereby pardoned, and an entrance opened
into heaven.”
We cannot allow it. We believe the absolution pronounced
by the Priest is only declarative and conditional. For judi
cially to pardon sin and absolve the sinner, is a power God
has reserved to himself.
Once more: You say, “Satisfaction is a compensation
made to God by alms, &c., for all offences committed against
him.”
We answer, (1.) It cannot be that we should satisfy God,
by any of our works. For, (2.) Nothing can make satisfaction
to Him, but the obedience and death of his Son.
8. We proceed to what they call “the sacrament of extreme
unction.” “The matter,” they say, “ of extreme unction is,
oil consecrated by the Bishop, and applied to the eyes, ears,
mouth, hands, feet, and reins of a person supposed to be near
death.” The form is: “By this holy anointing, God pardon
thee for whatever thou hast offended by the eyes, ears, mouth,
or touch.”
We reply: When the Apostles were sent forth, “they
anointed with oil many that were sick, and healed them;”
(Mark vi. 13;) using this as a sign of the miraculous cures to
be wrought. And St. James accordingly directs: “Is any
sick among you? Let him call for the Elders of the Church;
let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of
the Lord. And the prayer of faith shall save the sick.” (v. 14,
15.) But what has this to do with the extreme unction of the
Church of Rome? In the first Church, this anointing was a
mere rite: In the Church of Rome, it is made a sacrament I
It was used in the first Church for the body; it is used in
154 POPERY CALMLY CONSIDERED,
the Church of Rome for the soul: It was used then for the
recovery of the sick; now, for those only that are thought
past recovery. It is easy, therefore, to see, that the Romish
extreme unction has no foundation in Scripture.
9. We are now to consider what the Church of Rome
delivers concerning ordination. “This,” says she, “is properly
a sacrament. He that denies it, let him be accursed.”
“The orders received in the Church of Rome are seven :
The Priest, the Deacon, the Subdeacon, the Acolythus, to
carry the candle; the Exorcist, to cast out devils; the Reader,
and Door-keeper.”
On this, we observe, It is not worth disputing, whether
ordination should be called a sacrament or not. Let the
word then pass: But we object to the thing; there is no
divine authority for any order under a Deacon. Much less
is there any Scriptural authority for the forms of conjuration
prescribed to the Exorcists; or for the rites prescribed in
exorcising not only men, women, and children, but likewise
houses, cattle, milk, butter, or fruits, said to be infested with
the devil.
10. The next of their sacraments, so called, is marriage;
concerning which they pronounce, “Marriage is truly and
properly a sacrament. He that denies it so to be, let him be
accursed.”
We answer, In one sense it may be so. For St. Austin
says, “Signs, when applied to religious things, are called
sacraments.” In this large sense, he calls the sign of the
cross a sacrament; and others give this name to washing the
feet. But it is not a sacrament according to the Romish
definition of the word; for it no more “confers grace,” than
washing the feet or signing with the cross.
A more dangerous error in the Church of Rome is, the for
bidding the Clergy to marry. “Those that are married may
not be admitted into orders: Those that are admitted may
not marry : And those that, being admitted, do marry, are to
be separated.”
The Apostle, on the contrary, says, “Marriage is honour
able in all;” (Heb. xiii. 4;) and accuses those who “forbid
to marry,” of teaching “doctrines of devils.” How lawful
it was for the Clergy to marry, his directions concerning it
show. (1 Tim. iv. 1, 3.) And how convenient, yea, necessary,
in many cases it is, clearly appears from the innumerable
POPERY CALMLY CONSIDERED, 155
mischiefs which have in all ages followed the prohibition of
it in the Church of Rome; which so many wise and good
men, even of her own communion, have lamented.
I have now fairly stated, and calmly considered, most of
the particular doctrines of the Church of Rome. Permit me
to add a few considerations of a more general nature.
That many members of that Church have been holy men,
and that many are so now, I firmly believe. But I do not
know, if any of them that are dead were more holy than many
Protestants who are now with God; yea, than some of our
own country, who were very lately removed to Abraham's
bosom. To instance only in one : (Whom I mention the
rather, because an account of his life is extant :) I do not
believe that many of them, of the same age, were more holy
than Thomas Walsh. And I doubt if any among them, living
now, are more holy than several Protestants now alive.
But be this as it may: However, by the tender mercies
of God, many members of the Church of Rome have been,
and are now, holy men, notwithstanding their principles;
yet I fear many of their principles have a natural tendency
to undermine holiness; greatly to hinder, if not utterly to
destroy, the essential branches of it,-to destroy the love of
God, and the love of our neighbour, with all justice, and
mercy, and truth.
I wish it were possible to lay all prejudice aside, and to
consider this calmly and impartially. I begin with the
love of God, the fountain of all that holiness without which
we cannot see the Lord. And what is it that has a more
natural tendency to destroy this than idolatry? Consequently,
every doctrine which leads to idolatry, naturally tends to
destroy it. But so does a very considerable part of the avowed
doctrine of the Church of Rome. Her doctrine touching the
worship of angels, of saints, the Virgin Mary in particular, -
touching the worship of images, of relics, of the cross, and,
above all, of the host, or consecrated wafer,—lead all who
receive them to practise idolatry, flat, palpable idolatry; the
paying that worship to the creature which is due to God alone.
Therefore they have a natural tendency to hinder, if not
utterly destroy, the love of God.
Secondly. The doctrine of the Church of Rome has a
natural tendency to hinder, if not destroy, the love of our
ueighbour. By the love of our neighbour, I mean universal
156 POPERY CALMLY CONSIDERED.
benevolence; tender good-will to all men. For in this
respect every child of man, every son of Adam, is our neigh
bour; as we may easily learn from our Lord’s history of the
good Samaritan. Now, the Church of Rome, by asserting
that all who are not of her own Church, that is, the bulk of
mankind, are in a state of utter rejection from God, despised
and hated by Him that made them; and by her bitter (I
might say, accursed) anathemas, devoting to absolute, ever
lasting destruction, all who willingly or unwillingly differ from
her in any jot or tittle; teaches all her members to look upon
them with the same eyes that she supposes God to do; to
regard them as mere fire-brands of hell, “vessels of wrath,
fitted for destruction.” And what love can you entertain for
such? No other than you can believe God to have for them.
Therefore, every anathema denounced by the Church of Rome
against all who differ from her, has a natural tendency, not
only to hinder, but utterly destroy, the love of our neighbour.
Thirdly. The same doctrine which devotes to utter destruc
tion so vast a majority of mankind, must greatly indispose us
for showing them the justice which is due to all men. For
how hard is it to be just to them we hate? to render them
their due, either in thought, word, or action? Indeed, we vio
late justice by this very thing, by not loving them as ourselves,
For we do not render unto all their due; seeing love is due
to all mankind. If we “ owe no man anything” beside, do
we not owe this, “to love one another?” And where love is
totally wanting, what other justice can be expected? Will
not a whole train of injurious tempers and passions, of wrong
words and actions, naturally follow P So plain, so undeniably
plain it is, that this doctrine of the Church of Rome, (to
instance at present in no more,) that “all but those of their
own Church are accursed,” has a natural tendency to hinder,
yea, utterly to destroy, justice.
Fourthly. Its natural tendency to destroy mercy is equally
glaring and undeniable. We need not use any reasoning to
prove this: Only cast your eyes upon matter of fact! What
terrible proofs of it do we see in the execrable crusades against
the Albigenses! in those horrible wars in the Holy Land,
where so many rivers of blood were poured out! in the many
millions that have been butchered in Europe, since the begin
ning of the Reformation; not only in the open field, but in
prisons, on the scaffold, on the gibbet, at the stake I For how
POPERY CALMLY CONSIDERED. 157
many thousand lives, barbarously taken away, has Philip the
Second to give an account to God! For how many thousand,
that infamous, perfidious butcher, Charles the Ninth of
France 1 to say nothing of our own bloody Queen Mary, not
much inferior to them I See, in Europe, in America, in the
uttermost parts of Asia, the dungeons, the racks, the various
tortures of the Inquisition, so unhappily styled, the House of
Mercy! Yea, such mercy as is in the fiends in hell ! such
mercy as the natives of Ireland, in the last century, showed
to myriads of their Protestant countrymen | Such is the
mercy which the doctrine of the Church of Rome very
naturally inspires!
Lastly. The doctrine of the Church of Rome has a natural
tendency to destroy truth from off the earth. What can
more directly tend to this, what can more incite her own
members to all manner of lying and falsehood, than that
precious doctrine of the Church of Rome, that no faith is to
be kept with heretics? Can I believe one word that a man
says, who espouses this principle? I know it has been
frequently affirmed, that the Church of Rome has renounced
this doctrine. But I ask, When or where? By what public
and authentic act, notified to all the world? This principle
has been publicly and openly avowed by a whole Council, the
ever-renowned Council of Constance: An assembly never to
be paralleled, either among Turks or Pagans, for regard to
justice, mercy, and truth ! But when and where was it as
publicly disavowed? Till this is done in the face of the sun,
this doctrine must stand before all mankind as an avowed
principle of the Church of Rome.
And will this operate only toward heretics? toward the
supposed enemies of the Church? Nay, where men have
once learned not to keep faith with heretics, they will not
long keep it towards Catholics. When they have once over
leaped the bounds of truth, and habituated themselves to
lying and dissimulation, toward one kind of men, will they
not easily learn to behave in the same manner toward all
men? So that, instead of “putting away all lying,” they
will put away all truth; and instead of having “no guile
found in their mouth,” there will be found nothing else
therein
Thus naturally do the principles of the Romanists tend to
banish truth from among themselves. And have they not an
158 POPERY CALMLY CONSIDERED,
equal tendency to cause lying and dissimulation among those
that are not of their communion, by that Romish principle,
that force is to be used in matters of religion? that if men
are not of our sentiments, of our Church, we should thus
“compel them to come in ?” Must not this, in the very
nature of things, induce all those over whom they have any
power, to dissemble if not deny those opinions, who vary ever
so little from what that Church has determined ? And if a
habit of lying and dissimulation is once formed, it will not
confine itself to matters of religion. It will assuredly spread
into common life, and tincture the whole conversation.
Again: Some of the most eminent Roman casuists (whose
books are duly licensed by the heads of the Church) lay it
down as an undoubted maxim, that, although malicious lies
are sins, yet “officious lies, that is, lies told in order to do
good, are not only innocent, but meritorious.” Now, what a
flood-gate does this open for falsehood of every kind !
Therefore this doctrine, likewise, has a natural tendency to
banish truth from the earth.
One doctrine more of the Romish Church must not here
be passed over; I mean, that of absolution by a Priest; as it
has a clear, direct tendency to destroy both justice, mercy,
and truth; yea, to drive all virtue out of the world. For if a
man (and not always a very good man) has power to forgive
sins; if he can at pleasure forgive any violation, either of
truth, or mercy, or justice; what an irresistible temptation
must this be to men of weak or corrupt minds! Will they
be scrupulous with regard to any pleasing sin, when they can
be absolved upon easy terms? And if after this any scruple
remain, is not a remedy for it provided ? Are there not
Papal indulgences to be had; yea, plenary indulgences? I
have seen one of these which was purchased at Rome not
many years ago. This single doctrine of Papal indulgences
strikes at the root of all religion. And were the Church of
Rome ever so faultless in all other respects, yet till this
power of forgiving sins, whether by priestly absolution or
Papal indulgences, is openly and absolutely disclaimed, and
till these practices are totally abolished, there can be no
security in that Church for any morality, any religion, any
justice, or mercy, or truth.
A LETTER
To
THE PRINTER OF THE “PUBLIC ADVERTISER.”
OCCASIONED BY
THE LATE ACT PASSED IN FAVOUR OF POPERY.
To WHICH IS ADDED,
A DEFENCE OF IT, IN TWO LETTERS
To THE EDITORs of “THE FREEMAN's Journ AL,” DUBLIN.
SIR,
SoME time ago a pamphlet was sent me, entitled, “An
Appeal from the Protestant Association, to the People of
Great Britain.” A day or two since, a kind of answer to
this was put into my hand, which pronounces its style con
temptible, its reasoning futile, and its object malicious.
On the contrary, I think the style of it is clear, easy, and
natural; the reasoning, in general, strong and conclusive;
the object or design, kind and benevolent. And in pursuance
of the same kind and benevolent design, namely, to preserve
our happy constitution, I shall endeavour to confirm the
substance of that tract, by a few plain arguments.
With persecution I have nothing to do. I persecute nq
man for his religious principles. Let there be as “boundless
a freedom in religion” as any man can conceive. But this
does not touch the point: I will set religion, true or false,
utterly out of the question. Suppose the Bible, if you please,
to be a fable, and the Koran to be the word of God. I
consider not, whether the Romish religion be true or false;
I build nothing on one or the other supposition. Therefore,
away with all your common-place declamation about intoler
160 LETTER. To THE PRINTER
ance and persecution for religion 1 Suppose every word of
Pope Pius's creed to be true; suppose the Council of Trent
to have been infallible; yet, I insist upon it, that no govern
ment not Roman Catholic ought to tolerate men of the
Roman Catholic persuasion.
I prove this by a plain argument: (Let him answer it that
can :)—That no Roman Catholic does, or can, give security
for his allegiance or peaceable behaviour, I prove thus: It is
a Roman Catholic maxim, established, not by private men,
but by a public Council, that “no faith is to be kept with
heretics.” This has been openly avowed by the Council of
Constance; but it never was openly disclaimed. Whether
private persons avow or disavow it, it is a fixed maxim of the
Church of Rome. But as long as it is so, nothing can be
more plain, than that the members of that Church can give
no reasonable security to any Government of their allegiance
or peaceable behaviour. Therefore they ought not to be
tolerated by any Government, Protestant, Mahometan, or
Pagan.
You may say, “Nay, but they will take an oath of alle
giance.” True, five hundred oaths; but the maxim, “No
faith is to be kept with heretics,” sweeps them all away as a
spider's web. So that still no Governors that are not Roman
Catholics can have any security of their allegiance.
Again: Those who acknowledge the spiritual power of the
Pope can give no security of their allegiance to any Govern
ment; but all Roman Catholics acknowledge this: Therefore,
they can give no security for their allegiance.
The power of granting pardons for all sins, past, present,
and to come, is, and has been for many centuries, one branch
of his spiritual power.
But those who acknowledge him to have this spiritual
power can give no security for their allegiance; since they
believe the Pope can pardon rebellions, high treason, and all
other sins whatsoever.
The power of dispensing with any promise, oath, or vow, is
another branch of the spiritual power of the Pope. And all
who acknowledge his spiritual power must acknowledge this.
But whoever acknowledges the dispensing power of the Pope
can give no security for his allegiance to any Government.
Oaths and promises are none; they are light as air; a
dispensation makes them all null and void.
OF THE PUBLIC ADVERTISER. 161
Nay, not only the Pope, but even a Priest, has power to
pardon sins! This is an essential doctrine of the Church of
Rome. But they that acknowledge this cannot possibly give
any security for their allegiance to any Government. Oaths
are no security at all; for the Priest can pardon both perjury
and high treason.
Setting then religion aside, it is plain, that, upon principles
of reason, no Government ought to tolerate men who cannot
give any security to that Government for their allegiance and
peaceable behaviour. But this no Romanist can do, not only
while he holds that “no faith is to be kept with heretics;”
but so long as he acknowledges either priestly absolution, or
the spiritual power of the Pope.
“But the late Act,” you say, “does not either tolerate or
encourage Roman Catholics.” I appeal to matter of fact. Do
not the Romanists themselves understand it as a toleration?
You know they do. And does it not already (let alone what
it may do by and by) encourage them to preach openly, to
build chapels, (at Bath and elsewhere,) to raise seminaries,
and to make numerous converts day by day to their intolerant,
persecuting principles? I can point out, if need be, several
of the persons. And they are increasing daily.
But “nothing dangerous to English liberty is to be appre
hended from them.” I am not certain of that. Some time
since, a Romish Priest came to one I knew, and, after talking
with her largely, broke out, “You are no heretic; you have
the experience of a real Christian l’” “And would you,” she
asked, “burn me alive?” He said, “God forbid!—unless it
were for the good of the Church !”
Now, what security could she have had for her life, if it
had depended on that man? The good of the Church would
have burst all the ties of truth, justice, and mercy; especially
when seconded by the absolution of a Priest, or (if need were)
a Papal pardon.
If any one please to answer this, and to set his name, I
shall probably reply.—But the productions of anonymous
writers, I do not promise to take any notice of.
I am, Sir,
Your humble servant,
CITY-RoAD, JOHN WESLEY.
January 21, 1780.
VOL. X. M
TWO L ETTERS
To
THE EDITORS OF THE FREEMAN's JOURNAL,
DUBLIN.
TO THE READER.
SEv ERAL months since, Father O'Leary, a Capuchin Friar in Dublin, published
Remarks upon this Letter in the Freeman's Journal. As soon as these were
sent to me, I published a Reply in the same Paper. When I read more of
his Remarks, printed in five succeeding Journals, I wrote a second Reply; but
did not think it worth while to follow, step by step, so wild, rambling a writer.
Mr. O'Leary has now'put his six Letters into one, which are reprinted in London,
with this title, “Mr. O'Leary's remarks on the Rev. Mr. W.'s Letters in
Defence of the Protestant Associations in England; to which are prefixed Mr.
Wesley's Letters.”
Is it by negligence or by design, that there are so many mistakes even in a title
page?
1. “To which are prefixed Mr. W.'s Letters.” No : the second of those Letters
is not mine. I never saw it before.
2. But where are the two Letters published in the Freeman's Journal P Why is
a spurious Letter palmed upon us, and the genuine one suppressed ?
3. “Letters in Defence of the Protestant Associations in England.” Hold ! In
my first Letter I have only three lines in defence of a Tract published in
London. But I have not one line “in Defence of the Associations,” either
in London or elsewhere.
If Mr. O'Leary will seriously answer the two following Letters, he may expect a
serious reply. But if he has only drollery and low wit to oppose to argument,
I shall concern myself no further about him.
Lon Don,
Dec. 29, 1780.
LETTER. I.
GENTLEMEN,
1. MR. O'LEARY does well to entitle his Paper “Remarks,”
as that word may mean anything or nothing; but it is no
more an answer to my Letter, than to the Bull Unigenitus.
He likewise does wisely in prefacing his “Remarks” with so
FIRST LETTER TO THE FREEMAN's Journal. 163
handsome a compliment: This may naturally incline you to
think well of his judgment, which is no small point gained.
2. His manner of writing is easy and pleasant; but might
it not as well be more serious? The subject we are treating of
is not a light one: It moves me to tears rather than to laughter.
I plead for the safety of my country; yea, for the children that
are yet unborn. “But cannot your country be safe, unless
the Roman Catholics are persecuted for their religion?”
Hold! Religion is out of the question: But I would not have
them persecuted at all; I would only have them hindered
from doing hurt. I would not put it in their power (and I
do not wish that others should) to cut the throats of their
quiet neighbours. “But they will give security for their
peaceable behaviour.” They cannot while they continue
Roman Catholics; they cannot while they are members of
that Church which receives the decrees of the Council of Con
stance, which maintains the spiritual power of the Bishop of
Rome, or the doctrine of priestly absolution.
3. This I observed in my late Letter. Whoever, therefore,
would remark upon it to any purpose, must prove these three
things: (1.) That the decree of the Council of Constance
publicly made, has been publicly disclaimed. (2.) That the
Pope has not power to pardon sins, or to dispense with oaths,
vows, and promises. And, (3.) That no Priest has power to
pardon sins. But has Mr. O’Leary proved these three points?
Has he proved any one of them? He has, indeed, said
something upon the first : He denies such a decree was ever
made.
4. I am persuaded Mr. O’Leary is the first man that ever
made the important discovery. But, before he is quite sure,
let him look again into Father L’Abbe’s “Concilia Maxima,”
printed at Paris in the year 1672. The last volume contains
a particular account of the Council of Constance; one of
whose decrees (page 169) is, “That heretics ought to be put
to death, non obstantibus salvis conductibus Imperatoris,
Regum, &c., notwithstanding the public faith engaged to
them in the most solemn manner.” Who then can affirm
that no such doctrine or violation of faith with heretics is
authorized by this Council ? Without putting on spectacles,
which, blessed be God, I do not wear, I can read a little
Latin still. And, while I can, I must fix this horrid doctrine
on the Council of Constance.
M 2
164 FIRST LETTER. To
5. But, supposing the Council of Constance had never
advanced this doctrine, or the Church of Rome had publicly
disclaimed it, my conclusion stands good till it is proved,
(1.) That no Priest has a power of pardoning sins; and,
(2.) That the Pope has neither a power of pardoning sins, nor
of dispensing with oaths, vows, promises, &c.
Mr. O’Leary has proved neither of these: And what has
he proved? It is hard to say. But if he proves nothing, he
either directly or indirectly asserts many things. In particu
lar, he asserts, (1) “Mr. Wesley has arraigned in the jargon
of the Schools.” Heigh-day ! What has this to do here?
There is no more of the jargon of the Schools in my Letter,
than there is of Arabic. “The Catholics all over the world
are liars, perjurers,” &c. Nay, I have not arraigned one of
them. This is a capital mistake. I arraign the doctrines,
not the men. Either defend them, or renounce them.
“I do renounce them,” says Mr. O'Leary. Perhaps you
do. But the Church of Rome has never renounced them.
“He asperses our communion in a cruel manner.” I do not
asperse it at all in saying, these are the doctrines of the
Church of Rome. Who can prove the contrary?
(2) “Mr. O'Leary did not even attempt to seduce the
English soldiery.” I believe it; but does this prove any of
these three points? “But Queen Elizabeth and King James
roasted heretics in Smithfield !” In what year? I doubt the
fact. *
(3) “Mr. Wesley is become an apologist of those who
burned the chapel in Edinburgh.” Is not this said purely
ad movendam invidiam? “to inflame the minds of the
people?” For it has no shadow of truth. I never yet wrote
nor spoke one word in their defence. “He urged the rabble
to light that fire.” No more than he urged them to dethrone
the King.
(4) “Does Mr. Wesley intend to sound Alecto’s horn, or
the war-shell of the Mexicans?” All this is cruel aspersion
indeed; designed merely to inflame! What I intend is neither
more nor less than this,—to contribute my mite to preserve
our constitution both in Church and State.
(5.) “They were the Scotch and English regicides who
gave rise to the Irish massacre.” The Irish massacre Was
there ever any such thing? Was not the whole account a
mere Protestant lie? O no ! it was a melancholy truth,
THE FREEMAN's Journal. 165
wrote in the blood of many thousands. But the regicides no
more gave rise to that massacre than the Hottentots. The
whole matter was planned several years, and executed before
the King's death was thought of “But Mr. Wesley is
sowing the seeds of another massacre !” Such another as
the massacre of Paris?
6. “Was he the trumpeter of persecution when he was per
secuted himself?” Just as much as now. Cruel aspersions
still ! designed and calculated only to inflame. “Did he then
abet persecution on the score of conscience?” No, nor now.
Conscience is out of the question. “His Letter contains all
the horrors invented by blind misguided zeal, set forth in the
most bitter language.” Is this gentleman in his senses? I
hope not. Else I know not what excuse to make for him.
Not one bitter word is in my Letter. I have learned to put
away “all bitterness, with all malice.” But still this is wide
of the mark; which of those three points does it prove?
7. “In his Second Letter, he promises to put out the fire
which he has already kindled in England.” Second Letter /
What is that? I know nothing of it. The fire which he
has kindled in England. When? Where? I have kindled
no fire in England, any more than in Jamaica. I have done,
and will do, all that is in my power to put out that which
others have kindled.
8. “He strikes out a creed of his own for Roman Catholics.
This fictitious creed he forces upon them.” My words are
these: “Suppose every word of Pope Pius's Creed to be true.”
I say not a word more of the matter. Now, I appeal to every
reasonable man, Is this striking out a creed of my own for
Roman Catholics? Is this forcing a fictitious creed on them,
“like the Frenchman and the blunderer in the comedy?”
What have I to do with one or the other? Is not this dull
jest quite out of season? And is the creed, composed by the
Council of Trent, and the Bull of Pope Pius IV., a fictitious
one? Before Mr. O’Leary asserts this again, let him look
into the Concilia Maxima once more, and read there, Bulla
Pii Quarti super formá Juramenti professionis fidei.* This
forma professionis fidei I call Pope Pius’s Creed. If his
“stomach revolts from it,” who can help it?
9. Whether the account given by Philip Melancthon of the
* The Bull of Pius IV. concerning the form of the oath on the profession of
faith.-EDIT.
166 SECOND LETTER. To
words spoken (not in Hebrew, but in Latin) be true or false,
it does not at all affect the account of Miss Duchesne, which
I gave in her own words. And I cannot but observe, that,
after all the witticisms which he has bestowed upon it, Mr.
O'Leary does not deny that the Priest might have burnt her,
“had it been for the good of the Church.”
10. “Remark a Missionary inflaming the rabble, and
propagating black slander.” Remark a San Benito cap,
painted with devils; but let him put it on, whom it fits.
It does not fit me: I inflame no rabble: I propagate no
slander at all. But Mr. O'Leary does. He propagates a
heap of slander in these his Remarks. I say too, “Let the
appeal be made to the public and their impartial reason.”
I have nothing to do with the “jargon or rubbish of the
Schools,” lugged in like “the jargon of the Schools” before.
But I would be glad if Mr. O'Leary would tell us what these
two pretty phrases mean.
The whole matter is this. I have, without the least bitter
ness, advanced three reasons why I conceive it is not safe to
tolerate the Roman Catholics. But still, I would not have
them persecuted: I wish them to enjoy the same liberty,
civil and religious, which they enjoyed in England before the
late Act was repealed. Meantime, I would not have a sword
put into their hands; I would not give them liberty to hurt
others. Mr. O’Leary, with much archness and pleasantry, has
nibbled at one of these three reasons, leaving the other two
untouched. If he chooses to attack them in his next, I will
endeavour to give him a calm and serious answer.
I am, Gentlemen,
Your obedient servant,
JOHN WESLEY.
MANCHESTER, March 23, 1780.
LETTER II.
GENTLEMEN,
SoME time ago, in a Letter published at London, I observed,
“Roman Catholics cannot give those whom they account here
tics any sufficient security for their peaceable behaviour.”
l. Because it has been publicly avowed in one of their
THE FREEMAN’s Journal. 167
General Councils, and never publicly disclaimed, that faith
is not to be kept with heretics; 2. Because they hold the
doctrine of priestly absolution; and, 3. The doctrine of Papal
pardons and dispensations.
Mr. O'Leary has published “Remarks” on this letter;
nine parts in ten of which are quite wide of the mark. Not
that they are wide of his mark, which is to introduce a plausible
panegyric upon the Roman Catholics, mixed with keen invec
tives against the Protestants, whether true or false it matters
not. All this is admirably well calculated to inspire the
reader with aversion to these heretics, and to bring them back
to the holy, harmless, much-injured Church of Rome. And
I should not wonder, if these six papers should make six
thousand converts to her.
Close arguing he does not attempt; but he vapours and
skips to and fro, and rambles to all points of the compass, in
a very lively and entertaining manner.
Whatever has the face of an argument in his First Letter
I answered before. Those of the 14th, 16th, 18th, and 21st
instant, I pass over at present: I have now only to do with
what he advances in your Journal of March 12.
Here I read: “For Mr. Wesley's Second Letter, see the
last page.” I have seen it; but I can find no more of the
Second Letter in the last page, than in the first. It would
be strange if I did; for that Second Letter was never heard
of, but in Mr. O’L.’s “Remarks.” “But why then does he
mention it over and over?” Truly, I cannot tell.
He begins: “Fanaticism”—Hold ! There is no fanaticism
in my Letter, but plain, sober reason. I “now expect” (they
are his own words) “a serious answer to a serious charge.”
My argument was: The Council of Constance has openly
avowed violation of faith with heretics: But it has never been
openly disclaimed. Therefore those who receive this Council
cannot be trusted by those whom they account heretics. This
is my immediate conclusion. And if the premises be admitted,
it will infallibly follow.
On this Mr. O’L. says, “A Council so often quoted chal
lenges peculiar attention. We shall examine it with all
possible precision and impartiality. At a time when the
broachers of a new doctrine” (as new as the Bible) “were
kindling the fire of sedition, and shaking the foundations of
thrones and kingdoms,”—big words, but entirely void of
168 SECOND LETTER TO
truth!—“was held the Council of Constance. To this was
cited John Huss, famous for propagating errors, tending to
wrest the sceptre from the hands of Kings.”—Equally true !
“He was obnoxious to Church and State.” To the Church
of Rome; not to the State in any degree.
“Protestant and Catholic legislators enacted laws for
burning heretics.” How wisely are these jumbled together;
and the Protestants placed first ! But pray, what Protestant
legislator made such laws, either before or after the Catholic
ones? I know, one man, Servetus, was burned at Geneva;
but I know not that there was any law for it. And I know,
one woman, Joan Bocher, was burned in Smithfield, much
against the mind of King Edward. But what is this to the
numbers who were inhumanly butchered by Queen Mary;
to say nothing of her savage husband? “But the same laws
were executed by Queen Elizabeth and King James.” How?
Did either of these burn heretics? Queen Elizabeth put two
Anabaptists to death; but what was this to the achievements
of her sister?
He adds a well-devised apology for the Romish persecutions
of the Protestants as necessarily resulting from the nature of
things, and not from any wrong principles. And this he
illustrates by the treatment formerly given to the Methodists,
“whose love-feasts and watch-nights roused the vigilance of
the Magistrate, and influenced the rage of the rabble.”
Indeed, they did not. Not only no Magistrate ever objected
either to one or the other, but no mob, even in the most
turbulent times, ever interrupted them.
But to the Council: “Huss strikes at the root of all tem
poral power and civil authority. He boldly asserts, that all
Princes, Magistrates, &c., in the state of mortal sin, are
deprived, ipso facto, of all power and jurisdiction. And by
broaching these doctrines, he makes Bohemia a theatre of
intestine war. See the Acts of the Council of Constance in
L’Abbe’s Collection of Councils.”
I have seen them, and I can find nothing of all this therein.
But more of this by and by.
“He gave notice that he would stand his trial; but he
attempted to escape.” No, never; this is pure invention.
“He is arrested at Constance,”—whence he never attempted
to escape, -“and confined. His friends plead his safe-conduct.
The Council then declared, “No safe-conduct granted by
THE FREEMAN's Journal. 169
the Emperor or any other Princes, to heretics, ought to hinder
them from being punished as justice shall require. And the
person who has promised them security shall not be obliged
to keep his promise, by whatever tie he may be engaged.’”
And did the Council of Constance declare this? “Yes,”
says Mr. O’Leary. I desire no more. But, before I argue
upon the point, permit me to give a little fuller account of
the whole affair:—
The Council of Constance was called by the Emperor
Sigismund and Pope John XXIII., in the year 1414.
Before it began, the Emperor sent some Bohemian gentle
men to conduct John Huss to Constance, solemnly promising
that he should “come and return freely, without fraud or
interruption.”
But before he left Prague, he waited on the Bishop of
Nazareth, Papal Inquisitor for that city and diocese, who,
in the presence of many witnesses, gave him the following
testimonial:—
“We, Nicholas, do by these presents make known to all
men, that we have often talked with that honourable man,
Master John Huss, and in all his sayings, doings, and
behaviour, have proved him to be a faithful man; finding
no manner of evil, sinister, or erroneous doings in him, unto
this present. PRAGUE, August 30, 1414.”
This was attested by the hand and seal of the public notary,
named Michael Pruthatietz.
After this, Conrade, Archbishop of Prague, declared before
all the Barons of Bohemia, that “he knew not that John Huss
was culpable or faulty in any crime or offence whatever.”
So neither the Inquisitor nor the Archbishop knew anything
of “his making Bohemia a theatre of intestine war!”
In October he began his journey, accompanied by two
noblemen, Wencelat de Duba, and John de Clum. On
November 3d, he came to Constance, and was treated with
great respect. But not long after, he was suddenly arrested
and cast into a noisome prison. Here he quickly fell sick.
During his sickness, his accusers exhibited twelve articles
against him. But none of them charge him with sedition.
They relate purely to the Church.
May 14, 1415. The Nobles of Bohemia complained to the
Council, “When Master John Huss came to the Council,
under the Emperor's safe-conduct, he was, in violation of the
170 SECOND LETTER TO
public faith, imprisoned before he was heard.” They add :
“And he is now grievously tormented, both with fetters, and
with hunger and thirst.”
June 8. His accusers brought thirty-nine articles more,
and afterward twenty-six others. But both the former and
the latter relate wholly to the Church.
Seven more were brought next. The First of these is, “If
the Pope, Bishop, or Prelate be in deadly sin, he is then no
Pope, Bishop, or Prelate.” But this he himself explains in
the same tract whence it is taken. “Such, as touching their
deserts, are not worthily Popes or Pastors before God; yet,
as touching their office, are Popes and Pastors.”
After these, six more articles were exhibited; but all relate
to the Church, as do nineteen more that followed them. In
fine, nineteen others were preferred by the Chancellor and
University of Paris. One of these was, “No man being in
deadly sin is a true Pope, Prelate, or Lord.” This seems to
be the same with the preceding charge; only they have
mended it by adding the word Lord. Another was, “Subjects
ought publicly to reprove the vices of their rulers.” It does
not appear that ever he held this.
In the Seventeenth Session, the sentence and condemna
tion of John Huss was read and published. The Emperor
then commanded the Duke of Bavaria to deliver him to the
executioners; for which glorious exploit he was thus addressed
by the Bishop of Landy, in the name of the Council: “This
most holy and goodly labour was reserved only for thee, O
most noble Prince | Upon thee only doth it lie, to whom the
whole rule and ministration of justice is given. Wherefore
thou hast established thy praise and renown; even by the
mouths of babes and sucklings thy praise shall be celebrated
for evermore.”
From this whole transaction we may observe, 1. That John
Huss was guilty of no crime, either in word or action; even
his enemies, the Archbishop of Prague, and the Papal
Inquisitor, being Judges.
2. That he never preached or wrote anything tending to
sedition; neither was there in fact any sedition, much less
intestine war, in Bohemia, while he ministered there.
3. That his real fault, and his only one, was, opposing the
Papal usurpations.
4. That this “most noble Prince” was a bigoted, cruel,
THE FREEMAN’s Journ AL. 171
perfidious murderer; and that the Fathers of the Council
deserve the same praise, seeing they urged him to embrue his
hands in innocent blood, in violation of the public faith, and
extolled him to the skies for so doing; and seeing they have
laid it down as a maxim, that the most solemn promise made
to an heretic may be broken.
But says Mr. O'Leary, “This regards the peculiar case of
safe-conducts granted by Princes to heretics.” If you mean,
they took occasion from a particular case to establish a general
rule, this is true; but what then ? If the public faith with
heretics may be violated in one instance, it may be in a thou
sand. “But can the rule be extended farther?” It may;
it must; we cannot tell where to stop. Away then with your
witticisms on so awful a subject ! What I do you sport with
human blood? I take burning men alive to be a very serious
thing. I pray, spare your jests on the occasion.
But you have another plea: “Sigismund only promised to
guard him from any violence in going to the Council.” Why,
this was just nothing. What man in his wits would have
moved a step upon such a promise as this? “But this was
all it was in his power to do.” It was not. It was in his
power to have told the Council, “My own honour, and yours,
and that of the empire, are at stake. I will not upon any
account suffer the public faith to be violated: I will not make
myself infamous to all generations. My name shall not stink
to all future ages. I will rather part with my empire, with
my life.” He could have taken John Huss out of their hands,
and have sent him safe to his own country. He would have
done it, had he been an honest man; had he had either honour
or conscience. I ask Mr. O'Leary, Would not you have done
it, had you been in Sigismund's place? If you say, “No,”
a Protestant ought not to trust you, any more than he would
trust a wild bull.
I am afraid this is the case, for you strangely add: “It
was nugatory in Sigismund to grant him a safe-conduct; for
neither King nor Emperor could deprive the Bishops of their
right of judging” (add, and of murdering) “heretics.” It
is plain, Sigismund thought he could, that he could screen
Huss from all dangers; else he had been both a fool and a
knave to promise it; especially by a public instrument, which
pledged his own honour, and that of the whole empire, for
his safety.
172 seconD LETTER. To THE FREEMAN’s Journal.
Now for flourish: “Thus the superannuated charge of viola
tion of faith with heretics”—no more superannuated now,
than it was while John Huss was in the flames—“vanishes
away.” No, nor ever will. It still stares us in the face; and
will do so, till another General Council publicly and explicitly
repeals that infamous determination of the Council of Con
stance, and declares the burning of John Huss to have been
an open violation of all justice, mercy, and truth. But flourish
on: “The foundation then of Mr. Wesley’s aerial fabric being
sapped,”—not at all,—“the superstructure falls of course,
and his long train of false and unchristian assertions.” What
can this mean? I know of no “long train of assertions,”
whether true or false. I use three arguments, and no more,
in proof of one conclusion.
“What more absurd, than to insist on a General Council's
disclaiming a doctrine which they never taught !” They did
teach it; and that not by the by, not incidentally; but they
laid it down as a stated rule of action, dictated by the Holy
Ghost. I quote chapter and verse: I say too, “See “L’Abbe’s
Councils, printed at Paris, in 1672.” Yea, and they were
not ashamed to publish this determination to all the Christian
world! and to demonstrate their sincerity therein, by burning
a man alive. And this Mr. O’Leary humorously compares
to the roasting a piece of beef! With equal tenderness I
suppose he would compare the “making the beards of here
tics,” (that is, thrusting a burning furze-bush in their face,)
to the singeing a fowl before it was roasted.
“It is sufficient to disclaim it, when it is fixed upon us.”
Then disclaim it without delay; for it is fixed upon you, to all
intents and purposes. Nay, and you fix it upon yourselves,
in every new edition of the Councils; in all of which, this
Council stands in aeternam rei memoriam,” and this very deter
mination, without the least touch of blame ! It must there
fore stand as an avowed doctrine of the Church of Rome, that
“heretics ought to be condemned and executed, notwith
standing the most solemn assurances to the contrary:” In
other words, that “the public faith, even that of Kings and
Emperors, ought not to be kept with heretics.”
What security then for my life can any man give me, till he
utterly renounces the Council of Constance? What security
can any Romanist give a Protestant, till this doctrine is pub
* As a perpetual memorial of this matter.–EDIT.
DISAVOWAL OF PERSECUTING PAPISTS. 173
licly abjured? If Mr. O'Leary has anything more to plead
for this Council, I shall follow him step by step. But let
him keep his word, and “give a serious answer to a serious
charge.” Drollery may come in when we are talking of roast
ing fowls; but not when we are talking of roasting men.
Would I then wish the Roman Catholics to be persecuted?
I never said or hinted any such thing. I abhor the thought:
It is foreign to all I have preached and wrote for these fifty
years. But I would wish the Romanists in England (I had
no others in view) to be treated still with the same lenity that
they have been these sixty years; to be allowed both civil
and religious liberty, but not permitted to undermine ours.
I wish them to stand just as they did before the late Act was
passed; not to be persecuted or hurt themselves; but gently
restrained from hurting their neighbours.
I am, Gentlemen,
Your obedient servant,
CHESTER, JOHN WESLEY.
March 31, 1780.
A DISAWOWAL
OF PERSECUTING PAPISTS.
I HAvE read a Tract lately sent me, and will now give my
free thoughts upon the subject.
I set out early in life with an utter abhorrence of persecu
tion in every form, and a full conviction that every man has
a right to worship God according to his own conscience.
Accordingly, more than fifty years ago, I preached on those
words, “Ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of: For
the Son of man is not come to destroy men’s lives, but to
save them.” And I preached on the same text, in London,
the 5th of last November. And this I extend to members of
the Church of Rome, as well as to all other men.
I agree not only that many of these in former ages were
good men, (as Thomas à Kempis, Francis Sales, and the Mar
174. DISAVOWAL OF PERSECUTING PAPISTS.
quis de Renty,) but that many of them are so at this day. I
believe, I know some Roman Catholics who sincerely love
both God and their neighbour, and who steadily endeavour
to do unto every one as they wish him to do unto them.
But I cannot say this is a general case; nay, I am fully
convinced it is not. The generality of Roman Catholics,
wherever I have been, are of the same principles, and the
same spirit, with their forefathers. And, indeed, if they had
the same principles, it could not be doubted but they would
be of the same practice too, if opportunity should serve.
These principles openly avowed by their forefathers of
priestly absolution, Papal indulgences, and no faith to be
kept with heretics, have never been openly and authoritatively
disavowed even unto this day. And until they are, a Roman
Catholic, consistent with his principles, cannot be trusted by
a Protestant.
For the same principles naturally tend to produce the same
spirit and the same practice. Very lately, a person seeing
many flocking to a place, which she did not know was a
Romish chapel, innocently said, “What do all these people
want?” and was answered by one of them, with great vehe
mence, “We want your blood. And we will have it soon.”
On Friday last, I dined with a gentlewoman, whose father,
living in Dublin, was very intimate with a Roman Catholic
gentleman. Having invited him to dinner one day, in the
course of conversation, Mrs. Grattan asked him, “Sir, would
you really cut my husband's throat, if your Priest commanded
you?” He answered honestly, “Madam, Mr. Grattan is my
friend; and I love him well; but I must obey the Church.”
“Sir,” said she, “I beg I may never more see you within my
doors.”
But still, be their principles what they will, I would not
persecute them. So persecution is utterly out of the ques
tion. I know no one that pleads for it. Therefore the writing
or talking against it is time lost; it is proving what no one
denies.
And the Romanists never have been persecuted in England
since I remember. They have enjoyed a full toleration. I
wish them to enjoy the same toleration still; neither more
nor less.
I would not hurt a hair of their head. Meantime, I would
not put it into their power to hurt me, or anv other persons
oRIGIN of IMAGE-WoRSHIP AMONG CHRISTIANs. 175
whom they believe to be heretics. I steer the middle way. I
would neither kill nor be killed. I would not use the sword
against them, nor put it into their hands, lest they should use
it against me; I wish them well, but I dare not trust them.
But still I say, persecution is out of the question. And I
look on all vague declamations upon it, which have been lately
poured out, as either mere flourishes of persons who think
they talk prettily, or artful endeavours to puzzle the cause,
and to throw dust into the eyes of honest Englishmen.
JOHN WESLEY.
BRIsToL, March 18, 1782.
THE ORIGIN
OF
IMAGE-WORSHIP AMONG CHRISTIANS.
WHEN Christianity was first preached in the world, it
was supported by such miraculous assistance of the divine
power, that there was need of little or no human aid to the
propagation of it. Not only the Apostles, who first preached
it, but even the lay-believers were sufficiently instructed in
all the articles of faith, and were inspired with the power of
working miracles, and the gift of speaking in languages
unknown to them before.
But when the gospel was spread, and had taken root through
the world; when Kings and Princes became Christians, and
when temples were built and magnificently adorned for Chris
tian worship; then the zeal of some well-disposed Christians
brought pictures into the churches, not only as ornaments, but
as instructors of the ignorant; and from thence they were
called libri laicorum,-“the books of the people.” Thus the
walls of the churches were beset with pictures, representing
all the particular transactions mentioned. And they who did
not understand a letter of a book knew how to give a very
good account of the gospel, being taught to understand the
176 oRIGIN or IMAGE-worship AMoNG CHRISTIANs.
particular passages of it in the pictures of the church. Thus,
as hieroglyphics were the first means of propagating know
ledge, before writing by letters and words was invented; so
the more ignorant people were taught compendiously by
pictures, what, by the scarcity of teachers, they had not an
opportunity of being otherwise fully instructed in.
But these things, which were at first intended for good,
became, by the devil’s subtlety, a snare for the souls of Chris
tians. For when Christian Princes, and the rich and great,
vied with one another, who should embellish the temples with
greatest magnificence, the pictures upon the walls were turned
into gaudy images upon the altars; and the people being
deceived by the outward appearance of the Priests’ bowing and
kneeling, (before those images,) as the different parts of their
devotion led them, they imagined that those gestures were
designed to do honour to the images, before which they were
performed; (which they certainly were not;) and so, from
admiring, the people came to adore them. Thus, what were at
first designed as monuments of edification, became the instru
ments of superstition. This being a fatal oversight in the
Clergy, at first neglected, or winked at, by degrees (as all
errors have crept into the Church) gathered strength; so
that, from being in the beginning the dotage of the ignorant
vulgar, the poison infected those of better rank, and, by their
influence and countenance, brought some of the Priests over
to their opinion, or rather those Priests were the occasion of
deceiving the rich and powerful, especially the female sex, for
ends not very reputable or agreeable to the integrity of their
profession. But so it was, that what the Priests at first
winked at, they afterwards gave countenance to; and what
they once countenanced, they thought themselves obliged in
honour to defend; till, at last, superstition came to be preached
from the pulpits, and gross idolatry obtruded upon the people
for true devotion.
It is true, there were many of the sacred order, whose sound
hearts and clear heads were very averse to this innovation; who
both preached and wrote against the worship of images, showing
both the wickedness and folly of it. But the disease was so far
spread, and the poison had taken such root, that the conse
quence of opposition was the dividing the Church into parties
and schisms, and at last proceeded to blood and slaughter.
N. B. Is it not marvellous that what was so simple in the
LETTER TO A QUAKER. 177
beginning, should degenerate into such idolatry as is scarce
to be found in the heathen world! While this, and several
other errors, equally contrary to Scripture and reason, are
found in the Church, together with the abominable lives of
multitudes who call themselves Christians, the very name of
Christianity must stink in the nostrils of the Mahometans,
Jews, and Infidels.
A LETTER,
To
A PERSON LATELY JOINED WITH THE
PEOPLE CALLED QUAKERS.
1N ANSWER. To A LETTER WROTE BY HIM.
BRIsToL, February 10, 1747-8.
YoU ask me, “Is there any difference between Quakerism
and Christianity?” I think there is. What that difference
is, I will tell you as plainly as I can.
I will, First, set down the account of Quakerism, so called,
which is given by Robert Barclay; and, Then, add wherein
it agrees with, and wherein it differs from, Christianity.
“1. Seeing the height of all happiness is placed in the
true knowledge of God, the right understanding of this is
what is most necessary to be known in the first place.
“2. It is by the Spirit alone that the true knowledge of
God hath been, is, and can be, revealed. And these revela
tions, which are absolutely necessary for the building up of
true faith, neither do, nor can, ever contradict right reason
or the testimony of the Scriptures.”
Thus far there is no difference between Quakerism and
Christianity.
VOL. X. N
178 LETTER. To A PERSON
“Yet these revelations are not to be subjected to the
examination of the Scriptures as to a touchstone.”
Here there is a difference. The Scriptures are the touch
stone whereby Christians examine all, real or supposed,
revelations. In all cases they appeal “to the law and to the
testimony,” and try every spirit thereby.
“3. From these revelations of the Spirit of God to the
saints, have proceeded the Scriptures of truth.”
In this there is no difference between Quakerism and
Christianity.
“Yet the Scriptures are not the principal ground of all
truth and knowledge, nor the adequate, primary rule of faith
and manners. Nevertheless, they are a secondary rule,
subordinate to the Spirit. By Him the saints are led into all
truth. Therefore the Spirit is the first and principal leader.”
If by these words, “The Scriptures are not the principal
ground of truth and knowledge, nor the adequate, primary
rule of faith and manners,” be only meant, that “the Spirit
is our first and principal leader;” here is no difference
between Quakerism and Christianity.
But there is great impropriety of expression. For though
the Spirit is our principal leader, yet He is not our rule at
all; the Scriptures are the rule whereby he leads us into all
truth. Therefore, only talk good English; call the Spirit
our guide, which signifies an intelligent being, and the
Scriptures our rule, which signifies something used by an
intelligent being, and all is plain and clear.
“4. All mankind is fallen and dead, deprived of the sen
sation of this inward testimony of God, and subject to the
power and nature of the devil, while they abide in their natural
state. And hence not only their words and deeds, but all
their imaginations, are evil perpetually in the sight of God.
“5. God out of his infinite love hath so loved the world
that he gave his only Son, to the end that whosoever believeth
on him might have everlasting life. And he enlighteneth
every man that cometh into the world, as he tasted death for
every man.
“6. The benefit of the death of Christ is not only extended
to such as have the distinct knowledge of his death and
sufferings, but even unto those who are inevitably excluded
from this knowledge. Even these may be partakers of the
benefit of his death, though ignorant of the history, if they
LATELY JOINED WITH THE QUAKERS. 179
suffer his grace to take place in their hearts, so as of wicked
men to become holy.”
In these points there is no difference between Quakerism
and Christianity.
“7. As many as receive the light, in them is produced a
holy and spiritual birth, bringing forth holiness, righteous
ness, purity, and all other blessed fruits. By which holy
birth, as we are sanctified, so we are justified.”
Here is a wide difference between Quakerism and Chris
tianity. This is flat justification by works. Whereas, the
Christian doctrine is, that “we are justified by faith;” that
“unto him that worketh not, but believeth on Him that
justifieth the ungodly, his faith is counted to him for
righteousness.”
The ground of this mistake is, the not understanding the
meaning of the word justification. For Robert Barclay takes
it in the same sense as the Papists do, confounding it with
sanctification. So in page 208 of his “Apology,” he says, in
express terms, “Justification, taken in its proper signification,
is making one just; and is all one with sanctification.”
“8. In whom this holy birth is fully brought forth, the
body of sin and death is crucified, and their hearts are
subjected to the truth, so as not to obey any suggestion of
the evil one; but to be free from actual sinning and
transgressing of the law of God, and, in that respect, perfect.
“9. They in whom his grace hath wrought in part to
purify and sanctify them, may yet by disobedience fall from
it, and make shipwreck of the faith.”
In these propositions there is no difference between
Quakerism and Christianity.
The uncommon expression, “This holy birth brought
forth,” is taken from Jacob Behmen. And indeed so are
many other expressions used by the Quakers, as are also
many of their sentiments.
“10. By this light of God in the heart, every true Minister
is ordained, prepared, and supplied in the work of the ministry.”
As to part of this proposition, there is no difference between
Quakerism and Christianity. Doubtless, “every true Minis
ter is by the light of God prepared and supplied in the work
of the ministry.” But the Apostles themselves ordained them
by “laying on of hands.” So we read throughout the Acts
of the Apostles.
N 2
180 LETTER TO A PERSON
“They who have received this gift, ought not to use it as
a trade, to get money thereby. Yet it may be lawful for
such to receive what may be needful to them for food and
clothing.”
In this there is no difference between Quakerism and
Christianity.
“We judge it noways unlawful for a woman to preach in
the assemblies of God’s people.”
In this there is a manifest difference: For the Apostle
Paul saith expressly, ‘Let your women keep silence in the
Churches; for it is not permitted unto them to speak. And
if they will learn any thing, let them ask their husbands at
home; for it is a shame for women to speak in the Church.”
(1 Cor. xiv. 34, 35.)
Robert Barclay, indeed, says, “Paul here only reproves
the inconsiderate and talkative women.”
But the text says no such thing. It evidently speaks of
women in general.
Again: The Apostle Paul saith to Timothy, “Let the
woman learn in silence with all subjection. For I suffer not
a woman to teach, nor to usurp authority over the man,”
(which public teaching necessarily implies,) “but to be in
silence.” (1 Tim. ii. 11, 12.)
To this Robert Barclay makes only that harmless reply:
“We think this is not anyways repugnant to this doctrine.”
Not repugnant to this, “I do suffer a woman to teach !”
Then I know not what is.
“But a woman “laboured with Paul in the work of the
gospel.’” Yea, but not in the way he had himself expressly
forbidden.
“But Joel foretold, ‘Your sons and your daughters shall
prophesy.’ And ‘Philip had four daughters which prophe
sied.’ And the Apostle himself directs women to prophesy;
only with their heads covered.”
Very good. But how do you prove that prophesying in
any of these places means preaching?
“11. All true worship to God is offered in the inward and
immediate moving of his own Spirit. We ought not to pray or
preach where and when we will, but where and when we are
moved thereto by his Spirit. All other worship, both praises,
prayers, and preachings, which man sets about in his own will,
and at his own appointment, which he can begin and end at
LATELY JOINED WITH THE QUAKERS. 181
pleasure, do or leave undone, as himself sees meet, are but
superstitions, will-worship, and abominable idolatries.”
Here lies one of the main differences between Quakerism
and Christianity.
It is true indeed, that “all true worship to God is offered
in the inward and immediate moving of his own Spirit;” or,
(to speak plain,) that we cannot truly worship God, unless his
Spirit move or incline our hearts. It is equally true, that “we
ought to pray and preach, only where and when we are moved
thereto by his Spirit; ” but I fear you do not in anywise
understand what the being “moved by his Spirit” means.
God moves man, whom he has made a reasonable creature,
according to the reason which he has given him. He moves
him by his understanding, as well as his affections; by light,
as well as by heat. He moves him to do this or that by
conviction, full as often as by desire. Accordingly, you are
as really “moved by the Spirit” when he convinces you you
ought to feed him that is hungry, as when he gives you ever
so strong an impulse, desire, or inclination so to do.
In like manner, you are as really moved by the Spirit to
pray, whether it be in public or private, when you have a
conviction it is the will of God you should, as when you have
the strongest impulse upon your heart. And he does truly
move you to preach, when in His light you “see light”
clearly satisfying you it is his will, as much as when you feel
the most vehement impulse or desire to “hold forth the
words of eternal life.”
Now let us consider the main proposition: “All worship
which man sets about in his own will, and at his own appoint
ment”—Hold ! that is quite another thing. It may be at his
own appointment, and yet not in his own will. For instance:
It is not my own will to preach at all. It is quite contrary to
my will. Many a time have I cried out, “Lord, send by
whom thou wilt send; only send not me!” But I am moved
by the Spirit of God to preach: He clearly shows me it is his
will I should; and that I should do it when and where the
greatest number of poor sinners may be gathered together.
Moved by Him, I give up my will, and appoint a time and
place, when by his power I trust to speak in his name.
How widely different, then, from true Christianity is that
amazing sentence: “All praises, prayers, and preachings
which man can begin and end at his pleasure, do or leave
182 LETTER TO A PERSON
undone, as himself sees meet, are superstitions, will-worship,
and abominable idolatry in the sight of God!”
There is not one tittle of Scripture for this; nor yet is there
any sound reason. When you take it for granted, “In all
preachings which a man begins or ends at his pleasure, does
or leaves undone as he sees meet, he is not moved by the
Spirit of God,” you are too hasty a great deal. It may be by
the Spirit, that he sees meet to do or leave it undone. How
will you prove that it is not? His pleasure may depend on
the pleasure of God, signified to him by his Spirit. His
appointing this or that time or place does in nowise prove the
contrary. Prove me that proposition, if you can: “Every man
who preaches or prays at an appointed time, preaches or prays
in his own will, and not by the Spirit.”
That “all such preaching is will-worship, in the sense St.
Paul uses the word,” is no more true than that it is murder.
That it is superstition, remains also to be proved. That it is
abominable idolatry, how will you reconcile with what follows
but a few lines after? “However, it might please God, who
winked at the times of ignorance, to raise some breathings
and answer them.” What! answer the breathings of abomi
nable idolatry ! I observe how warily this is worded; but it
allows enough. If God ever raised and answered those
prayers which were made at set times, then those prayers
could not be abominable idolatry.
Again: That prayers and preachings, though made at
appointed times, may yet proceed from the Spirit of God,
may be clearly proved from those other words of Robert
Barclay himself, page 389:—
“That preaching or prayer which is not done by the actings
and movings of God’s Spirit cannot beget faith.” Most true.
But preaching and prayer at appointed times have begotten
faith both at Bristol and Paulton. You know it well. There
fore that preaching and prayer, though at appointed times,
was “done by the actings and movings of God’s Spirit.”
It follows, that this preaching and prayer were far from
“abominable idolatry.” That expression can never be
defended. Say, It was a rash word, and give it up.
In truth, from the beginning to the end, you set this matter
upon a wrong foundation. It is not on this circumstance,—
the being at set times or not, that the acceptableness of our
prayers depends; but on the intention and tempers with which
LATELY JOINED WITH THE QUAKERS. 183
we pray. He that prays in faith, at whatsoever time, is heard.
In every time and place, God accepts him who “lifts up holy
hands, without wrath or doubting.” The charge of super
stition, therefore, returns upon yourself; for what gross
superstition is this, to lay so much stress on an indifferent
circumstance, and so little on faith and the love of God!
But to proceed: “We confess singing of psalms to be a
part of God's worship, and very sweet and refreshful when it
proceeds from a true sense of God’s love; but as for formal
singing, it has no foundation in Scripture.”
In this there is no difference between Quakerism and
Christianity.
But let it be observed here, that the Quakers in general
cannot be excused, if this is true. For if they “confess
singing of psalms to be a part of God’s worship,” how dare
they either condemn or neglect it?
“Silence is a principal part of God’s worship; that is, men's
sitting silent together, ceasing from all outwards, from their
own words and actings, in the natural will and comprehen
sion, and feeling after the inward seed of life.”
In this there is a manifest difference between Quakerism
and Christianity.
This is will-worship, if there be any such thing under
heaven. For there is neither command nor example for it in
Scripture.
Robert Barclay indeed refers to abundance of scriptures to
prove it is a command. But as he did not see good to set
them down at length, I will take the trouble to transcribe a
few of them:
“Wait on the Lord: Be of good courage, and he shall
strengthen thine heart.” (Psalm xxvii. 14.) “Rest in the
Lord, and wait patiently; fret not thyself at him who prosper
eth in his way.” “Wait on the Lord, and keep his way, and
he shall exalt thee to inherit the land.” (Psalm xxxvii. 7, 34.)
“Say not thou, I will recompense evil; but wait on the Lord,
and he shall save thee.” (Prov. xx. 22.)
By these one may judge of the rest. But how amazing is
this ! What are all these to the point in question?
For examples of silent meetings he refers to the five texts
following:—
“They were all with one accord in one place.” (Acts ii. 1.)
“So they sat down with him seven days and seven nights,
184 LETTER TO A PERSON
and none spake a word unto him: For they saw that his
grief was very great.” (Job ii. 13.) “Then were assembled
unto me every one that trembled at the words of God. And
I sat astonied until the evening sacrifice.” (Ezra ix. 4.)
“Then came certain of the elders of Israel unto me, and sat
before me.” (Ezek. xiv. 1; xx. 1.)
Was it possible for Robert Barclay to believe, that any one
of these texts was anything to the purpose?
The odd expressions here also, “Ceasing from all outwards,
in the natural will and comprehension, and feeling after the
inward seed of life,” are borrowed from Jacob Behmen.
“12. As there is one Lord and one faith, so there is one
baptism.” Yea, one outward baptism; which you deny.
Here, therefore, is another difference between Quakerism and
Christianity.
But “if those whom John baptized with water were not
baptized with the baptism of Christ, then the baptism of
water is not the baptism of Christ.”
This is a mere quibble. The sequel ought to be, “Then
that baptism of water” (that is, John's baptism) “was not
the baptism of Christ.” Who says it was?
Yet Robert Barclay is so fond of this argument, that he
repeats it almost in the same words:
“If John, who administered the baptism of water, yet did
not baptize with the baptism of Christ, then the baptism of
water is not the baptism of Christ.”
This is the same fallacy still. The sequel here also
should be, “Then that baptism of water was not the baptism
of Christ.”
He repeats it, with a little variation, a third time: “Christ
himself saith, ‘John baptized with water, but ye shall be
baptized with the Holy Ghost.’”
He repeats it a fourth time: “Peter saith, “Then remem
bered I the word of the Lord, John baptized with water,
but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost. From all
which it follows, that such as John baptized with water, yet
were not baptized with the baptism of Christ.” Very true.
But this proves neither more nor less than that the baptism
of John differed from the baptism of Christ. And so doubt
less it did; not indeed as to the outward sign, but as to the
inward grace.
“13. The breaking of bread by Christ with his disciples
LATELY JOINED WITH THE QUAKERS. 185
was but a figure, and ceases in such as have obtained the
substance.”
Here is another manifest difference between Quakerism
and Christianity.
From the very time that our Lord gave that command,
“Do this in remembrance of me,” all Christians throughout
the habitable world did eat bread and drink wine in remem
brance of him.
Allowing, therefore, all that Robert Barclay affirms for
eighteen or twenty pages together, viz., (1.) That believers
partake of the body and blood of Christ in a spiritual manner:
(2.) That this may be done, in some sense, when we are not
eating bread and drinking wine : (3.) That the Lutherans,
Calvinists, and Papists, differ from each other with regard to
the Lord’s supper: And, (4.) That many of them have
spoken wildly and absurdly concerning it: Yet all this will
never prove, that we need not do what Christ has expressly
commanded to be done; and what the whole body of Christians
in all ages have done, in obedience to that command.
That there was such a command, you cannot deny. But
you say, “It is ceased in such as have obtained the
substance.”
St. Paul knew nothing of this. He says nothing of its
ceasing in all he writes of it to the Corinthians. Nay, quite
the contrary. He says, “As often as ye eat this bread, and
drink this cup, ye do show the Lord’s death till he come.”
O, say you, the Apostle means “his inward coming, which
some of the Corinthians had not yet known.” Nay, this
cannot be his meaning. For he saith to all the Corinthian
communicants, “Ye do show the Lord's death till he come.”
Now, if He was not come (spiritually) in some of these,
undoubtedly he was in others. Consequently, he cannot be
speaking here of that coming which, in many of them at least,
was already past. It remains, that he speaks of his coming
in the clouds, to judge both the quick and dead.
In what Robert Barclay teaches concerning the Scriptures,
justification, baptism, and the Lord’s supper, lies the main
difference between Quakerism and Christianity.
“14. Since God hath assumed to himself the dominion of
the conscience, who alone can rightly instruct and govern it;
therefore it is not lawful for any whatsoever to force the
consciences of others.”
186 LETTER. To A PERSON
In this there is no difference at all between Quakerism and
Christianity.
“15. It is not lawful for Christians to give or receive
titles of honour, as, Your Majesty, Your Lordship, &c.”
In this there is a difference between Quakerism and Chris
tianity. Christians may give titles of honour, such as are
usually annexed to certain offices.
Thus St. Paul gives the usual title of “Most Noble” to the
Roman Governor. Robert Barclay indeed says, “He would
not have called him such, if he had not been truly noble; as
indeed he was, in that he would not give way to the fury of
the Jews against him.”
The Scripture says quite otherwise; that he did give way to
the fury of the Jews against him. I read: “Festus, willing to
do the Jews a pleasure, (who had desired a favour against him,
that he would send for him to Jerusalem, lying in wait in the
way to kill him,) said to Paul, Wilt thou go up to Jerusalem,
and there be judged of these things before me? Then said
Paul, I stand at Caesar’s judgment-seat, where I ought to be
judged: To the Jews have I done no wrong, as thou very
well knowest. If I have done anything worthy of death, I
refuse not to die; but if there be none of these things
whereof these accuse me, no man may deliver me unto them.”
Hence it plainly appears, that Festus was a very wicked
person, one who, “to do the Jews a pleasure,” would have
betrayed the innocent blood. But although St. Paul was not
ignorant of his character, still he calls him, “Most Noble
Festus,” giving him the title of his office; which, indeed, was
neither more nor less than saying, “Governor Festus,” or,
“King Agrippa.”
It is therefore mere superstition to scruple this. And it is,
if possible, greater superstition still to scruple saying, you, vous,
or ihr, whether to one or more persons, as is the common way
of speaking in any country. It is this which fixes the lan
guage of every nation. It is this which makes me say you in
England, vous in France, and ihr in Germany, rather than thou,
tu, or du, rather than av, as, or n N ; which, if we speak strictly,
is the only scriptural language; not thou, or thee, any more
than you. But the placing religion in such things as these is
such egregious trifling, as naturally tends to make all religion
stink in the nostrils of Infidels and Heathens.
And yet this, by a far greater abuse of words than that you
LATELY JOINED WITH THE QUAKERS. 187
would reform, you call the plain language. O my friend he
uses the plain language who speaks the truth from his heart;
not he who says thee or thou, and in the meantime will
dissemble or flatter, like the rest of the world.
“It is not lawful for Christians to kneel, or bow the body,
or uncover the head, to any man.”
If this is not lawful, then some law of God forbids it. Can
you show me that law? If you cannot, then the scrupling
this is another plain instance of superstition, not Christianity.
“It is not lawful for a Christian to use superfluities in
apparel; as neither to use such games, sports, and plays,
under the notion of recreations, as are not consistent with
gravity and godly fear.”
As to both these propositions, there is no difference
between Quakerism and Christianity. Only observe, touching
the former, that the sin of superfluous apparel lies chiefly in
the superfluous expense. To make it therefore a point of
conscience to differ from others, as to the shape or colour of
your apparel, is mere superstition; let the difference lie in the
price, that you may have the more wherewith to clothe them
that have none.
“It is not lawful for Christians to swear before a Magistrate,
nor to fight in any case.”
Whatever becomes of the latter proposition, the former is
no part of Christianity; for Christ himself answered upon
oath before a Magistrate. Yea, he would not answer till he
was put to his oath; till the High Priest said unto him, “I
adjure thee by the living God.”
Friend, you have an honest heart, but a weak head; you
have a zeal, but not according to knowledge. You was zealous
once for the love of God and man, for holiness of heart and
holiness of life. You are now zealous for particular forms
of speaking, for a set of phrases, and opinions. Once your zeal
was against ungodliness and unrighteousness, against evil
tempers and evil works. Now it is against forms of prayer,
against singing psalms or hymns, against appointing times of
praying or preaching; against saying you to a single person,
uncovering your head, or having too many buttons upon
your coat. O what a fall is here ! What poor trifles are
these, that now well-nigh engross your thoughts | Come back,
come back, to the weightier matters of the law, to spiritual,
rational, scriptural religion. No longer waste your time and
188 TREATISE ON BAPTISM.
strength in beating the air, in vain controversies and strife of
words; but bend your whole soul to the growing in grace
and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, to the
continually advancing in that holiness, without which you
cannot see the Lord.
A T R E AT IS E O N B A PT IS M.
CoNCERNING baptism I shall inquire, what it is; what
benefits we receive by it; whether our Saviour designed it
to remain always in his Church; and who are the proper
subjects of it.
I. 1. What it is. It is the initiatory sacrament, which enters
us into covenant with God. It was instituted by Christ, who
alone has power to institute a proper sacrament, a sign, seal,
pledge, and means of grace, perpetually obligatory on all
Christians. We know not, indeed, the exact time of its insti
tution; but we know it was long before our Lord’s ascension.
And it was instituted in the room of circumcision. For, as
that was a sign and seal of God’s covenant, so is this.
2. The matter of this sacrament is water; which, as it
has a natural power of cleansing, is the more fit for this
symbolical use. Baptism is performed by washing, dipping,
or sprinkling the person, in the name of the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, who is hereby devoted to the ever-blessed
Trinity. I say, by washing, dipping, or sprinkling; because
it is not determined in Scripture in which of these ways it
shall be done, neither by any express precept, nor by any
such example as clearly proves it; nor by the force or meaning
of the word baptize.
3. That there is no express precept, all calm men allow.
Neither is there any conclusive example. John’s baptism in
some things agreed with Christ's, in others differed from it.
But it cannot be certainly proved from Scripture, that even
John’s was performed by dipping. It is true he baptized in
Enon, near Salim, where there was “much water.” But this
might refer to breadth rather than depth; since a narrow place
would not have been sufficient for so great a multitude. Nor
can it be proved, that the baptism of our Saviour, or that
TREATISE ON BAPTISM. 189
administered by his disciples, was by immersion. No, nor
that of the eunuch baptized by Philip ; though “they both
went down to the water:” For that going down may relate
to the chariot, and implies no determinate depth of water. It
might be up to their knees; it might not be above their ankles.
4. And as nothing can be determined from Scripture pre
cept or example, so neither from the force or meaning of the
word. For the words baptize and baptism do not necessarily
imply dipping, but are used in other senses in several places.
Thus we read, that the Jews “were all baptized in the
cloud and in the sea;” (1 Cor. x. 2;) but they were not
plunged in either. They could therefore be only sprinkled
by drops of the sea-water, and refreshing dews from the
cloud; probably intimated in that, “Thou sentest a gracious
rain upon thine inheritance, and refreshedst it when it was
weary.” (Psalm lxviii. 9.) Again: Christ said to his two
disciples, “Ye shall be baptized with the baptism that I am
baptized with ;” (Mark x. 38;) but neither he nor they were
dipped, but only sprinkled or washed with their own blood.
Again we read (Mark vii. 4) of the baptisms (so it is in the
original) of pots and cups, and tables or beds. Now, pots
and cups are not necessarily dipped when they are washed.
Nay, the Pharisees washed the outsides of them only. And
as for tables or beds, none will suppose they could be dipped.
Here, then, the word baptism, in its natural sense, is not
taken for dipping, but for washing or cleansing. And, that
this is the true meaning of the word baptize, is testified by
the greatest scholars and most proper judges in this matter.
It is true, we read of being “buried with Christ in baptism.”
But nothing can be inferred from such a figurative expression.
Nay, if it held exactly, it would make as much for sprinkling
as for plunging; since, in burying, the body is not plunged
through the substance of the earth, but rather earth is
poured or sprinkled upon it.
5. And as there is no clear proof of dipping in Scripture,
so there is very probable proof of the contrary. It is highly
probable, the Apostles themselves baptized great numbers,
not by dipping, but by washing, sprinkling, or pouring water.
This clearly represented the cleansing from sin, which is
figured by baptism. And the quantity of water used was not
material; no more than the quantity of bread and wine in the
Lord's supper. The jailer “ and all his house were baptized”
190 TREATISE ON BABTISM.
in the prison; Cornelius with his friends, (and so several
households,) at home. Now, is it likely, that all these had
ponds or rivers, in or near their houses, sufficient to plunge
them all? Every unprejudiced person must allow, the contrary
is far more probable. Again : Three thousand at one time,
and five thousand at another, were converted and baptized by
St. Peter at Jerusalem; where they had none but the gentle
waters of Siloam, according to the observation of Mr. Fuller:
“There were no water-mills in Jerusalem, because there was
no stream large enough to drive them.” The place, therefore,
as well as the number, makes it highly probable that all these
were baptized by sprinkling or pouring, and not by immer
sion. To sum up all, the manner of baptizing (whether by
dipping or sprinkling) is not determined in Scripture. There
is no command for one rather than the other. There is no
example from which we can conclude for dipping rather than
sprinkling. There are probable examples of both; and both
are equally contained in the natural meaning of the word.
II. 1. What are the benefits we receive by baptism, is the
next point to be considered. And the first of these is, the
washing away the guilt of original sin, by the application of
the merits of Christ’s death. That we are all born under the
guilt of Adam's sin, and that all sin deserves eternal misery,
was the unanimous sense of the ancient Church, as it is
expressed in the Ninth Article of our own. And the Scripture
plainly asserts, that we were “shapen in iniquity, and in sin did
our mother conceive us;” that “we were all by nature children
of wrath, and dead in trespasses and sins;” that “in Adam
all die;” that “by one man’s disobedience all were made
sinners;” that “by one man sin entered into the world, and
death by sin; which came upon all men, because all had
sinned.” This plainly includes infants; for they too die;
therefore they have sinned: But not by actual sin; therefore,
by original; else what need have they of the death of Christ?
Yea, “death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over those
who had not sinned” actually “according to the simili
tude of Adam’s transgression.” This, which can relate to
infants only, is a clear proof that the whole race of mankind
are obnoxious both to the guilt and punishment of Adam’s
transgression. But “as by the offence of one, judgment came
upon all men to condemnation; so by the righteousness of one,
the free gift came upon all men, to justification of life.” And
TREATISE ON BAPTISM. 191
the virtue of this free gift, the merits of Christ's life and death,
are applied to us in baptism. “He gave himself for the
Church, that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing
of water by the word;” (Eph. v. 25, 26;) namely, in baptism,
the ordinary instrument of our justification. Agreeably to
this, our Church prays in the baptismal office, that the person
to be baptized may be “washed and sanctified by the Holy
Ghost, and, being delivered from God's wrath, receive remis
sion of sins, and enjoy the everlasting benediction of his
heavenly washing; ” and declares in the Rubric at the end of
the office, “It is certain, by God’s word, that children who
are baptized, dying before they commit actual sin are saved.”
And this is agreeable to the unanimous judgment of all the
ancient Fathers.
2. By baptism we enter into covenant with God; into that
everlasting covenant, which he hath commanded for ever;
(Psalm czi. 9;) that new covenant, which he promised to make
with the spiritual Israel; even to “give them a new heart and
a new spirit, to sprinkle clean water upon them,”-(of which
the baptismal is only a figure,) “and to remember their sins
and iniquities no more;” in a word, to be their God, as he pro
mised to Abraham, in the evangelical covenant which he made
with him and all his spiritual offspring. (Gen. xvii. 7, 8.) And as
circumcision was then the way of entering into this covenant,
so baptism is now; which is therefore styled by the Apostle,
(so many good interpreters render his words,) “the stipula
tion, contract, or covenant of a good conscience with God.”
3. By baptism we are admitted into the Church, and conse
quently made members of Christ, its Head. The Jews were
admitted into the Church by circumcision, so are the Chris
tians by baptism. For “as many as are baptized into Christ,”
in his name, “have” thereby “put on Christ;” (Gal. iii. 27;)
that is, are mystically united to Christ, and made one with
him. For “by one Spirit we are all baptized into one body,”
(1 Cor. xii. 13) namely, the Church, “the body of Christ.”
(Eph. iv. 12.) From which spiritual, vital union with him,
proceeds the influence of his grace on those that are baptized;
as from our union with the Church, a share in all its privi
leges, and in all the promises Christ has made to it.
4. By baptism, we who were “by nature children of wrath”
are made the children of God. And this regeneration which
our Church in so many places ascribes to baptism is more
192 TREATISE ON BAPTISM,
than barèly being admitted into the Church, though commonly
connected therewith; being “grafted into the body of Christ’s
Church, we are made the children of God by adoption and
grace.” This is grounded on the plain words of our Lord:
“Except a man be born again of water and of the Spirit, he
cannot enter into the kingdom of God.” (John iii. 5.) By
water then, as a means, the water of baptism, we are rege
nerated or born again; whence it is also called by the
Apostle, “the washing of regeneration.” Our Church there
fore ascribes no greater virtue to baptism than Christ himself
has done. Nor does she ascribe it to the outward washing,
but to the inward grace, which, added thereto, makes it a
sacrament. Herein a principle of grace is infused, which will
not be wholly taken away, unless we quench the Holy Spirit
of God by long-continued wickedness.
5. In consequence of our being made children of God, we
are heirs of the kingdom of heaven. “If children,” (as the
Apostle observes) “then heirs, heirs of God, and joint-heirs
with Christ.” Herein we receive a title to, and an earnest of,
“a kingdom which cannot be moved.” Baptism doth now
save us, if we live answerable thereto; if we repent, believe,
and obey the gospel: Supposing this, as it admits us into
the Church here, so into glory hereafter.
III. 1. But did our Saviour design this should remain
always in his Church 2 This is the Third thing we are to
consider. And this may be dispatched in a few words, since
there can be no reasonable doubt, but it was intended to last
as long as the Church into which it is the appointed means
of entering. In the ordinary way, there is no other means
of entering into the Church or into heaven.
2. In all ages, the outward baptism is a means of the
inward; as outward circumcision was of the circumcision of
the heart. Nor would it have availed a Jew to say, “I have
the inward circumcision, and therefore do not need the out
ward too: ” That soni was to be cut off from his people.
He had despised, he had broken, God’s everlasting covenant,
by despising the seal of it. (Gen. xvii. 14.) Now, the seal of
circumcision was to last among the Jews as long as the law
lasted, to which it obliged them. By plain parity of reason,
baptism, which came in its room, must last among Christians
as long as the gospel covenant into which it admits, and
whereunto it obliges, all nations.
TREATISE ON BAPTISM. 193
3. This appears also from the original commission which
our Lord gave to his Apostles: “Go, disciple all nations,
baptizing them in the name of the Father, of the Son, and
of the Holy Ghost; teaching them. And lo # I am with you
always, even unto the end of the world.” Now, as long as this
commission lasted, as long as Christ promised to be with them
in the execution of it, so long doubtless were they to execute it,
and to baptize as well as to teach. But Christ hath promised
to be with them, that is, by his Spirit, in their successors, to
the end of the world. So long, therefore, without dispute, it
was his design that baptism should remain in his Church.
IV. 1. But the grand question is, Who are the proper
subjects of baptism? grown persons only, or infants also ?
In order to answer this fully, I shall, First, lay down the
grounds of infant baptism, taken from Scripture, reason, and
primitive, universal practice; and, Secondly, answer the
objections against it.
2. As to the grounds of it: If infants are guilty of original
sin, then they are proper subjects of baptism; seeing, in the
ordinary way, they cannot be saved, unless this be washed away
by baptism. It has been already proved, that this original
stain cleaves to every child of man; and that hereby they are
children of wrath, and liable to eternal damnation. It is true,
the Second Adam has found a remedy for the disease which
came upon all by the offence of the first. But the benefit
of this is to be received through the means which he hath
appointed; through baptism in particular, which is the ordi
mary means he hath appointed for that purpose; and to
which God hath tied us, though he may not have tied himself.
Indeed, where it cannot be had, the case is different, but
extraordinary cases do not make void a standing rule. This
therefore is our First ground. Infants need to be washed from
original sin; therefore they are proper subjects of baptism.
3. Secondly. If infants are capable of making a covenant,
and were and still are under the evangelical covenant, then
they have a right to baptism, which is the entering seal
thereof. But infants are capable of making a covenant, and
were and still are under the evangelical covenant.
The custom of nations and common reason of mankind prove
that infants may enter into a covenant, and may be obliged by
compacts made by others in their name, and receive advantage
by them. But we have stronger proof than this, even God's
VOL. X. O
194 TREATISE ON BAPTISM.
own word: “Ye stand this day all of you before the Lord,
—your captains, with all the men of Israel; your little ones,
your wives and the stranger,-that thou shouldest enter into
covenant with the Lord thy God.” (Deut. xxix. 10–12.)
Now, God would never have made a covenant with little ones,
if they had not been capable of it. It is not said children
only, but little children, the Hebrew word properly signifying
infants. And these may be still, as they were of old, obliged
to perform, in aftertime, what they are not capable of per
forming at the time of their entering into that obligation.
4. The infants of believers, the true children of faithful
Abraham, always were under the gospel covenant. They
were included in it, they had a right to it and to the seal
of it; as an infant heir has a right to his estate, though
he cannot yet have actual possession. The covenant with
Abraham was a gospel covenant; the condition the same,
namely, faith, which the Apostle observes was “imputed unto
him for righteousness.” The inseparable fruit of this faith
was obedience; for by faith he left his country, and offered
his son. The benefits were the same; for God promised, “I
will be thy God, and the God of thy seed after thee:” And he
can promise no more to any creature; for this includes all
blessings, temporal and eternal. The Mediator is the same;
for it was in his Seed, that is, in Christ, (Gen. xxii. 18;
Gal. iii. 16,) that all nations were to be blessed; on which
very account the Apostle says, “The gospel was preached
unto Abraham.” (Gal. iii. 8.) Now, the same promise that
was made to him, the same covenant that was made with
him, was made “with his children after him.” (Gen. xvii. 7;
Gal. iii. 7.) And upon that account it is called “an ever
lasting covenant.” In this covenant children were also obliged
to what they knew not, to the same faith and obedience with
Abraham. And so they are still; as they are still equally
entitled to all the benefits and promises of it.
5. Circumcision was then the seal of the covenant; which is
itself therefore figuratively termed the covenant. (Acts vii. 8.)
Hereby the children of those who professed the true religion
were then admitted into it, and obliged to the conditions of it;
and when the law was added, to the observance of that also.
And when the old seal of circumcision was taken off, this of
baptism was added in its room; our Lord appointing one
positive institution to succeed another. A new seal was set to
TREATISE ON BAPTISM. 195P
Abraham’s covenant; the seals differed, but the deed was the
same; only that part was struck off which was political or cere
monial. That baptism came in the room of circumcision, appears
as well from the clear reason of the thing, as from the Apostle's
argument, where, after circumcision, he mentions baptism, as
that wherein God had “forgiven us our trespasses;” to which
he adds, the “blotting out the hand-writing of ordinances,”
plainly relating to circumcision and other Jewish rites; which
as fairly implies, that baptism came in the room of circum
cision, as our Saviour’s styling the other sacrament the pass
over, (Col. ii. 11—13; Luke xxii. 15,) shows that it was insti
tuted in the place of it. Nor is it any proof that baptism did
not succeed circumcision, because it differs in some circum
stances, any more than it proves the Lord’s supper did not suc
ceed the passover, because in several circumstances it differs
from it. This then is a Second ground. Infants are capable of
entering into covenant with God. As they always were, so they
still are, under the evangelical covenant. Therefore they have
a right to baptism, which is now the entering seal thereof.
6. Thirdly. If infants ought to come to Christ, if they
are capable of admission into the Church of God, and conse
quently of solemn sacramental dedication to him, then they
are proper subjects of baptism. But infants are capable of
coming to Christ, of admission into the Church, and solemn
dedication to God.
That infants ought to come to Christ, appears from his own
words: “They brought little children to Christ, and the dis
ciples rebuked them. And Jesus said, Suffer little children to
come unto me, and forbid them not; for of such is the kingdom
of heaven.” (Matt. xix. 13, 14.) St. Luke expresses it still
more strongly: “They brought unto him even infants, that he
might touch them.” (xviii. 15.) These children were so little
that they were brought to him; yet he says, “Suffer them to
come unto me:” So little, that he “took them up in his arms;”
yet he rebukes those who would have hindered their coming
to him. And his command respected the future as well as the
present. Therefore his disciples or Ministers are still to suffer
infants to come, that is, to be brought, unto Christ. But they
cannot now come to him, unless by being brought into the
Church; which cannot be but by baptism. Yea, and “ of
such,” says our Lord, “is the kingdom of heaven;” not of
such only as were like these infants. For if they themselves
O 2
196 TREATISE ON BAPTISM.
were not fit to be subjects of that kingdom, how could others
be so, because they were like them? Infants, therefore, are
capable of being admitted into the Church, and have a right
thereto. Even under the Old Testament they were admitted
into it by circumcision. And can we suppose they are in a
worse condition under the gospel, than they were under the
law? and that our Lord would take away any privileges
which they then enjoyed? Would he not rather make
additions to them? This, then, is a Third ground. Infants
ought to come to Christ, and no man ought to forbid them.
They are capable of admission into the Church of God.
Therefore, they are proper subjects of baptism.
7. Fourthly. If the Apostles baptized infants, then are
they proper subjects of baptism. But the Apostles baptized
infants, as is plain from the following consideration: The
Jews constantly baptized as well as circumcised all infant
proselytes. Our Lord, therefore, commanding his Apostles
to proselyte or disciple all nations by baptizing them, and not
forbidding them to receive infants as well as others, they
must needs baptize children also.
That the Jews admitted proselytes by baptism as well as
by circumcision, even whole families together, parents and
children, we have the unanimous testimony of their most
ancient, learned, and authentic writers. The males they
received by baptism and circumcision; the women by baptism
only. Consequently, the Apostles, unless our Lord had
expressly forbidden it, would of course do the same thing.
Indeed, the consequence would hold from circumcision only.
For if it was the custom of the Jews, when they gathered
proselytes out of all nations, to admit children into the Church
by circumcision, though they could not actually believe the
law, or obey it; then the Apostles, making proselytes to
Christianity by baptism, could never think of excluding
children, whom the Jews always admitted, (the reason for
their admission being the same,) unless our Lord had
expressly forbidden it. It follows, the Apostles baptized
infants. Therefore, they are proper subjects of baptism.
8. If it be objected, “There is no express mention in
Scripture of any infants whom the Apostles baptized,” I
would ask, Suppose no mention had been made in the Acts
of those two women baptized by the Apostles, yet might we
not fairly conclude, that when so many thousands, so many
TREATISE ON BAPTISM. 197
entire households, were baptized, women were not excluded ?
especially since it was the known custom of the Jews to bap
tize them? The same holds of children; nay, more strongly,
on the account of circumcision. Three thousand were baptized
by the Apostles in one day, and five thousand in another.
And can it be reasonably supposed that there were no children
among such vast numbers? Again: The Apostles baptized
many families; nay, we hardly read of one master of a family,
who was converted and baptized, but his whole family (as was
before the custom among the Jews) were baptized with him:
Thus the “jailer’s household, he and all his; the household of
Gaius, of Stephanas, of Crispus.” And can we suppose, that
in all these households, which, we read, were, without excep
tion, baptized, there should not be so much as one child or
infant? But to go one step further: St. Peter says to the
multitude, “Repent and be baptized, every one of you, for
the remission of sins. For the promise is to you, and to your
children.” (Acts ii. 38,39.) Indeed, the answer is made directly
to those who asked, “What shall we do?” But it reaches
farther than to those who asked the question. And though
children could not actually repent, yet they might be baptized.
And that they are included, appears, (1.) Because the Apostle
addresses to “every one” of them, and in “every one”
children must be contained. (2.) They are expressly mentioned:
“The promise is to you, and to your children.”
9. Lastly. If to baptize infants has been the general prac
tice of the Christian Church in all places and in all ages, then
this must have been the practice of the Apostles, and, conse
quently, the mind of Christ. But to baptize infants has been
the general practice of the Christian Church, in all places and
in all ages. Of this we have unexceptionable witnesses: St.
Austin for the Latin Church, who flourished before the year
400; and Origen for the Greek, born in the second century;
both declaring, not only that the whole Church of Christ did
then baptize infants, but likewise that they received this prac
tice from the Apostles themselves. (August. de Genesi, l. 10,
c. 23; Orig. in Rom. vi.) St. Cyprian likewise is express for it,
and a whole Council with him. (Epist. ad Fidum.) If need
were, we might cite likewise Athanasius, Chrysostom, and a
cloud of witnesses. Nor is there one instance to be found in
all antiquity, of any orthodox Christian who denied baptism
to children when brought to be baptized; nor anv one of the
198 TREATISE ON BAPTISM.
Fathers, or ancient writers, for the first eight hundred years
at least, who held it unlawful. And that it has been the prac
tice of all regular Churches ever since, is clear and manifest.
Not only our own ancestors when first converted to Christianity,
not only all the European Churches, but the African too and
the Asiatic, even those of St. Thomas in the Indies, do, and
ever did, baptize their children. The fact being thus cleared,
that infant baptism has been the general practice of the Chris
tian Church in all places and in all ages, that it has continued
without interruption in the Church of God for above seven
teen hundred years, we may safely conclude, it was handed
down from the Apostles, who best knew the mind of Christ.
10. To sum up the evidence: If outward baptism be gene
rally, in an ordinary way, necessary to salvation, and infants
may be saved as well as adults, nor ought we to neglect any
means of saving them; if our Lord commands such to come,
to be brought unto him, and declares, “Of such is the king
dom of heaven;” if infants are capable of making a covenant,
or having a covenant made for them by others, being included
in Abraham’s covenant, (which was a covenant of faith, an
evangelical covenant) and never excluded by Christ; if they
have a right to be members of the Church, and were accord
ingly members of the Jewish; if, suppose our Lord had
designed to exclude them from baptism, he must have expressly
forbidden his Apostles to baptize them, (which none dares to
affirm he did,) since otherwise they would do it of course,
according to the universal practice of their nation; if it is
highly probable they did so, even from the letter of Scripture,
because they frequently baptized whole households, and it
would be strange if there were no children among them; if
the whole Church of Christ, for seventeen hundred years
together, baptized infants, and were never opposed till the
last century but one, by some not very holy men in Germany;
lastly, if there are such inestimable benefits conferred in
baptism, the washing away the guilt of original sin, the
engrafting us into Christ, by making us members of his
Church, and thereby giving us a right to all the blessings of
the gospel; it follows, that infants may, yea, ought to be
baptized, and that none ought to hinder them.
I am, in the Last place, to answer those objections which
are commonly brought against infant baptism:—
1. The chief of these is: “Our Lord said to his Apostles,
TREATISE ON BAPTISM. 199
“Go and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. (Matt. xxviii. 19.)
Here Christ himself put teaching before baptizing. There
fore, infants, being incapable of being taught, are incapable of
being baptized.”
I answer, (1.) The order of words in Scripture is no certain
rule for the order of things. We read in St. Mark i. 4:
“John baptized in the wilderness, and preached the baptism
of repentance;” and, verse 5, “They were baptized of him in
Jordan, confessing their sins.” Now, either the order of words
in Scripture does not always imply the same order of things;
or it follows, that John baptized before his hearers either
confessed or repented. But, (2.) The words are manifestly
mistranslated. For if we read, “Go and teach all nations,
baptizing them,—teaching them to observe all things,” it
makes plain tautology, vain and senseless repetition. It ought
to be translated, (which is the literal meaning of the words,)
“Go and make disciples of all nations, by baptizing them.”
That infants are capable of being made proselytes or disciples
has been already proved; therefore this text, rightly trans
lated, is no valid objection against infant baptism.
2. Their next objection is: “The Scripture says, “Repent
and be baptized; believe and be baptized. Therefore, repent
ance and faith ought to go before baptism. But infants are
incapable of these; therefore they are incapable of baptism.”
I answer: Repentance and faith were to go before circum
cision, as well as before baptism. Therefore, if this argument
held, it would prove just as well, that infants were incapable
of circumcision. But we know God himself determined the
contrary, commanding them to be circumcised at eight days
old. Now, if infants were capable of being circumcised, not
withstanding that repentance and faith were to go before
circumcision in grown persons, they are just as capable of
being baptized; notwithstanding that repentance and faith
are, in grown persons, to go before baptism. This objection,
therefore, is of no force; for it is as strong against circum
cision of infants as infant baptism.
3. It is objected, Thirdly, “There is no command for it in
Scripture. Now, God was angry with his own people, because
they did that which, he said, ‘I commanded them not.’ (Jer.
vii. 31.) One plain text would end all the dispute.”
I answer, (1.) We have reason to fear it would not: It is
200 TREATISE ON BAPTISM,
as positively commanded in a very plain text of Scripture, that
we should “teach and admonish one another with psalms,
and hymns, and spiritual songs, singing to the Lord with
grace in our hearts,” (Eph. v. 19,) as it is to honour our
father and mother: But does this put an end to all dispute?
Do not these very persons absolutely refuse to do it, notwith
standing a plain text, an express command?
I answer, (2.) They themselves practise what there is
neither express command nor clear example for in Scripture.
They have no express command for baptizing women. They
say, indeed, “Women are implied in “all nations.” They
are; and so are infants too: But the command is not express
for either. And for admitting women to the Lord's supper,
they have neither express command nor clear example. Yet
they do it continually, without either one or the other. And
they are justified therein by the plain reason of the thing.
This also justifies us in baptizing infants, though without
express command or clear example.
If it be said, “But there is a command, ‘Let a man,”
avópwros, ‘examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread;’
(1 Cor. xi. 28;) the word ‘man,’ in the original, signifying
indifferently either men or women: ”I grant it does in other
places; but here the word “himself,” immediately following,
confines it to men only. “But women are implied in it, though
not expressed.” Certainly; and so are infants in “all nations.”
“But we have Scripture example for it: For it is said in
the Acts, “The Apostles continued in prayer and supplication
with the women.”’’ True, in prayer and supplication; but it
is not said, “in communicating: ” Nor have we one clear
example of it in the Bible.
Since, then, they admit women to the communion, without
any express command or example, but only by consequence
from Scripture, they can never show reason why infants
should not be admitted to baptism, when there are so many
scriptures which by fair consequence show they have a right
to it, and are capable of it.
As for the texts wherein God reproves his people for doing
“what he commanded them not;” that phrase evidently
means, what he had forbidden; particularly in that passage
of Jeremiah. The whole verse is, “They have built the high
places of Tophet, to burn their sons and their daughters in
the fire, which I commanded them not.” Now, God had
DIFFERENCE BETweeN THE MoRAVIANs, &c. 201
expressly forbidden them to do this; and that on pain of
death. But surely there is a difference between the Jews
offering their sons and daughters to devils, and Christians
offering theirs to God.
On the whole, therefore, it is not only lawful and innocent,
but meet, right, and our bounden duty, in conformity to the
uninterrupted practice of the whole Church of Christ from the
earliest ages, to consecrate our children to God by baptism, as
the Jewish Church were commanded to do by circumcision.
November 11, 1756.
AN EXTRACT
FROM
“A SHORT VIEW OF THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN
THE MORAVIAN BRETHREN, (so CALLED,)
AND THE REv. MR. JoHN AND CHARLEs wFSLEY.”
TO THE READER.
As those who are under the direction of Count Zinzendorf (vulgarly called Mora
vian Brethren) are the most plausible, and therefore far the most dangerous, of
all the Antinomians now in England, I first endeavour to guard such as are
simple of heart against being taken by those cunning hunters.
THE difference between the Moravian doctrine and ours (in
this respect) lies here:
They believe and teach,—
“1. That Christ has done all which was necessary for the
salvation of all mankind.
“2. That, consequently, we are to do nothing, as necessary
to salvation, but simply to believe in him.
“3. That there is but one duty now, but one command,
viz., to believe in Christ.
“4. That Christ has taken away all other commands and
duties, having wholly ‘abolished the law; that a believer is
202 DIFFERENCE BETWEEN
therefore ‘free from the law, is not obliged thereby to do or
omit anything; it being inconsistent with his liberty to do
anything as commanded.
“5. That we are sanctified wholly the moment we are justi
fied, and are neither more nor less holy to the day of our
death; entire sanctification, and entire justification, being in
one and the same instant.
“6. That a believer is never sanctified or holy in himself,
but in Christ only; he has no holiness in himself at all, all
his holiness being imputed, not inherent.
“7. That if a man regards prayer, or searching the Scrip
tures, or communicating, as matter of duty; if he judges
himself obliged to do these things, or is troubled when he
does them not; he is in bondage; he has no faith at all, but
is seeking salvation by the works of the law.”
We believe that the first of these propositions is ambiguous,
and all the rest utterly false.
“1. Christ has done all that was necessary for the salvation
of all mankind.”
This is ambiguous. Christ has not done all which was neces
sary for the absolute salvation of all mankind. For notwith
standing all that Christ has done, he that believeth not shall
be damned. But he has done all which was necessary for
the conditional salvation of all mankind; that is, if they
believe; for through his merits all that believe to the end,
with the faith that worketh by love, shall be saved.
“2. We are to do nothing as necessary to salvation, but
simply to believe in Him.”
If we allow the Count’s definition of faith, namely, “the
historical knowledge of this truth, that Christ has been a man
and suffered death for us,” (Sixteen Discourses, p. 57) then
is this proposition directly subversive of the whole revelation
of Jesus Christ.
“3. There is but one duty now, but one command, viz.,
to believe in Christ.”
Almost every page in the New Testament proves the false
hood of this assertion.
“4. Christ has taken away all other commands and duties,
having wholly abolished the law.”
How absolutely contrary is this to his own solemn declara
tion l—“Think not that I am come to destroy the law or
the Prophets. I am not come to destroy, but to fulfil.
THE MORAVIANS AND METHODISTS. 203
One jot or one tittle shall in nowise pass from the law, till
heaven and earth pass.”
“Therefore a believer is free from the law.” That he is
“free from the curse of the law,” we know ; and that he is
“free from the law,” or power, “ of sin and death: ” But
where is it written that he is free from the law of God?
“He is not obliged thereby to do or omit anything, it being
inconsistent with his liberty to do anything as commanded.”
So your liberty is a liberty to disobey God; whereas ours is a
liberty to obey him in all things: So grossly, while we “establish
the law,” do you “make void the law through faith !”
“5. We are sanctified wholly the moment we are justified,
and are neither more nor less holy to the day of our death;
entire sanctification and entire justification being in one and
the same instant.”
Just the contrary appears both from the tenor of God’s
word, and the experience of his children.
“6. A believer is never sanctified or holy in himself, but
in Christ only. He has no holiness in himself at all; all his
holiness being imputed, not inherent.”
Scripture holiness is the image of God; the mind which was
in Christ; the love of God and man; lowliness, gentleness,
temperance, patience, chastity. And do you coolly affirm,
that this is only imputed to a believer, and that he has none
at all of this holiness in him? Is temperance imputed only to
him that is a drunkard still ; or chastity, to her that goes on
in whoredom? Nay, but a believer is really chaste and
temperate. And if so, he is thus far holy in himself.
Does a believer love God, or does he not? If he does, he
has the love of God in him. Is he lowly, or meek, or patient
at all? If he is, he has these tempers in himself; and if he
has them not in himself, he is not lowly, or meek, or patient.
You cannot therefore deny, that every believer has holiness
in, though not from, himself; else you deny, that he is holy
at all; and if so, he cannot see the Lord.
And indeed, if holiness in general be the mind which was
in Christ, what can any one possibly mean by, “A believer
is not holy in himself, but in Christ only? that the mind
which was in Christ is in a believer also; but it is in Him,—
not in himself, but in Christ !” What a heap of palpable
self-contradiction, what senseless jargon, is this!
“7. If a man regards prayer, or searching the Scriptures,
204 PREDESTINATION CALMLY CONSIDERED.
or communicating, as matter of duty; if he judges himself
obliged to do these things, or is troubled when he does them
not, he is ‘in bondage,’ he has no faith at all, but is seeking
salvation by the works of the law.”
Thus obedience with you is a proof of unbelief, and disobe
dience a proof of faith ! What is it, to put darkness for light,
and light for darkness, if this is not?
PREDESTINATION CALMLY CONSIDERED
THAT to the height of this great argument,
I may assert eternal Providence,
And justify the ways of God with man.–MILTON.
1. I AM inclined to believe, that many of those who enjoy
the “faith which worketh by love,” may remember some
time when the power of the Highest wrought upon them in
an eminent manner; when the voice of the Lord laid the
mountains low, brake all the rocks in pieces, and mightily
shed abroad his love in their hearts, by the Holy Ghost given
unto them. And at that time it is certain they had no
power to resist the grace of God. They were then no more
able to stop the course of that torrent which carried all before
it, than to stem the waves of the sea with their hand, or to
stay the sun in the midst of heaven.
2. And the children of God may continually observe how
his love leads them on from faith to faith; with what tenderness
He watches over their souls; with what care He brings them
back if they go astray, and then upholds their going in his
path, that their footsteps may not slide. They cannot but
observe how unwilling He is to let them go from serving him;
and how, notwithstanding the stubbornness of their wills, and
the wildness of their passions, he goes on in his work, conquering
and to conquer, till he hath put all his enemies under his feet.
3. The farther this work is carried on in their hearts, the
more earnestly do they cry out, “Not unto us, O Lord, but
unto thy name give the praise, for thy mercy and for thy
truth’s sake !” the more deeply are they convinced that “by
grace we are saved; not of works, lest any man should boast;”
*REDESTINATION CALMLY CONSIDERED. 205
that we are not pardoned and accepted with God for the sake
of anything we have done, but wholly and solely for the sake
of Christ, of what he hath done and suffered for us; the more
assuredly likewise do they know, that the condition of this
acceptance is faith alone; before which gift of God no good
work can be done, none which hath not in it the nature of sin.
4. How easily then may a believer infer, from what he hath
experienced in his own soul, that the true grace of God always
works irresistibly in every believer! that God will finish wher
ever he has begun this work, so that it is impossible for any
believer to fall from grace and, lastly, that the reason why
God gives this to some only and not to others, is, because, of
his own will, without any previous regard either to their faith
or works, he hath absolutely, unconditionally, predestinated
them to life, before the foundation of the world !
5. Agreeable hereto, in “The Protestant Confession of
Faith,” drawn up at Paris, in the year 1559, we have these
words:
“We believe, that out of the general corruption and con
demnation in which all men are plunged, God draws those
whom, in his eternal and unalterable counsel, he has elected
by his own goodness and mercy, through our Lord Jesus
Christ, without considering their works, leaving the others in
the same corruption and condemnation.” (Article 12.)
6. To the same effect speak the Dutch Divines, assembled
at Dort in the year 1618. Their words are:
“Whereas, in process of time, God bestowed faith on
some, and not on others,—this proceeds from his eternal
decree; according to which, he softems the hearts of the elect,
and leaveth them that are not elect in their wickedness and
hardness.
“And herein is discovered the difference put between
men equally lost; that is to say, the decree of election and
reprobation.
“Election is the unchangeable decree of God, by which,
before the foundation of the world, he hath chosen in Christ
unto salvation a set number of men. This election is one
and the same of all which are to be saved.
“Not all men are elected, but some not elected; whom
God, in his unchangeable good pleasure, hath decreed to leave
in the common misery, and not to bestow saving faith upon
them; but leaving them in their own ways, at last to con
206 PREDESTINATION CALMLY CONSIDERED.
demn and punish them everlastingly, for their unbelief, and
also for their other sins. And this is the decree of
reprobation.” (Article 6, et seq.)
7. Likewise in “The Confession of Faith” set forth by the
Assembly of English and Scotch Divines, in the year 1646,
are these words:—
“God from all eternity did unchangeably ordain whatsoever
comes to pass.
“By the decree of God, for the manifestation of his glory,
some men and angels are predestinated unto everlasting life,
and others fore-ordained to everlasting death.
“These angels and men thus predestinated and fore
ordained are particularly and unchangeably designed, and
their number so certain and definite that it cannot be either
increased or diminished.
“Those of mankind that are predestinated unto life, God,
before the foundation of the world, hath chosen in Christ unto
everlasting glory, without any foresight of faith or good works.
“The rest of mankind God was pleased, for the glory of
his sovereign, power over his creatures, to pass by, and to
ordain them to dishonour and wrath.” (Chapter 3.)
No less express are Mr. Calvin’s words, in his “Christian
Institutions:”—
“All men are not created for the same end; but some are
fore-ordained to eternal life, others to eternal damnation.
So according as every man was created for the one end or
the other, we say, he was elected, that is, predestinated to
life, or reprobated, that is, predestinated to damnation.”
(Cap. 21, sec. 1.)
8. Indeed there are some who assert the decree of election,
and not the decree of reprobation. They assert that God
hath, by a positive, unconditional decree, chosen some to life
and salvation; but not that he hath by any such decree
devoted the rest of mankind to destruction. These are they
to whom I would address myself first. And let me beseech
you, brethren, by the mercies of God, to lift up your hearts
to him, and to beg of him to free you from all prepossession,
from the prejudices even of your tender years, and from
whatsoever might hinder the light of God from shining in
upon your souls. Let us calmly and fairly weigh these things
in the balance of the sanctuary. And let all be done in love
and meekness of wisdom, as becomes those who are fighting
PREDESTINATION CALMLY CONSIDERED. 207
under one Captain, and who humbly hope they are joint
heirs through him of the glory which shall be revealed.
I am verily persuaded, that, in the uprightness of your
hearts, you defend the decree of unconditional election; even
in the same uprightness wherein you reject and abhor that
of unconditional reprobation. But consider, I intreat you,
whether you are consistent with yourselves; consider, whe
ther this election can be separate from reprobation; whether
one of them does not imply the other, so that, in holding
one, you must hold both.
9. That this was the judgment of those who had the most
deeply considered the nature of these decrees, of the Assembly
of English and Scotch Divines, of the Reformed Churches
both in France and the Low Countries, and of Mr. Calvin
himself, appears from their own words, beyond all possibility
of contradiction. “Out of the general corruption,” saith the
French Church, “he draws those whom he hath elected;
leaving the others in the same corruption, according to his
immovable decree.” “By the decree of God,” says the
Assembly of English and Scotch Divines, “some are predesti
nated unto everlasting life, others fore-ordained to everlasting
death.” “God hath once for all,” saith Mr. Calvin, “appointed,
by an eternal and unchangeable decree, to whom he would
give salvation, and whom he would devote to destruction.”
(Inst., cap. 3, sec. 7.) Nay, it is observable, Mr. Calvin
speaks with utter contempt and disdain of all who endeavour
to separate one from the other, who assert election without
reprobation. “Many,” says he, “as it were to excuse God,
own election, and deny reprobation. But this is quite silly
and childish. For election cannot stand without reprobation.
Whom God passes by, those he reprobates. It is one and
the same thing.” (Inst., l. 3, c. 23, sec. 1.)
10. Perhaps upon deeper consideration, you will find yourself
of the same judgment. It may be, you also hold reprobation,
though you know it not. Do not you believe, that God who
made “one vessel unto honour,” hath made “another unto.”
eternal “dishonour?” Do not you believe, that the men who
“turn the grace of our God into lasciviousness, were before
ordained of God unto this condemnation?” Do not you think,
that for “this same purpose God raised Pharaoh up, that he
might show his sovereign power in his destruction?” and that
“Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated,” refers to their
208 PREDESTINATION CALMLY CONSIDERED.
eternal state? Why, then, you hold absolute reprobation,
and you think Esau and Pharaoh were instances of it, as
well as all those “vessels made unto dishonour,” those men
“before ordained unto condemnation.”
11. To set this matter in a still clearer light, you need only
answer one question: Is any man saved who is not elected?
Is it possible, that any not elected should be saved ? If you
say, “No,” you put an end to the doubt. You espouse
election and reprobation together. You confirm Mr. Calvin’s
words, that “without reprobation, election itself cannot
stand.” You allow, (though you was not sensible of it before,)
that “whom God elects not, them he reprobates.”
Try whether it be possible, in any particular case, to separate
election from reprobation. Take one of those who are supposed
not to be elected; one whom God hath not chosen unto life and
salvation. Can this man be saved from sin and hell? You
answer, “No.” Why not? “Because he is not elected.
Because God hath unchangeably decreed to save so many
souls, and no more; and he is not of that number. Him God
hath decreed to pass by; to leave him to everlasting destruc
tion; in consequence of which irresistible decree, the man
perishes everlastingly.” O, my brethren, how small is the
difference between this, and a broad, barefaced reprobation |
12. Let me intreat you to make this case your own. In
the midst of life, you are in death; your soul is dead while
you live, if you live in sin, if you do not live to God. And
who can deliver you from the body of this death? Only the
grace of God in Jesus Christ our Lord. But God hath
decreed to give this grace to others only, and not to you; to
leave you in unbelief and spiritual death, and for that
unbelief to punish you with death everlasting. Well then
mayest thou cry, even till thy throat is dry, “O wretched
man that I am l’ For an unchangeable, irresistible decree
standeth between thee and the very possibility of salvation.
Go now and find out how to split the hair between thy being
reprobated and not elected; how to separate reprobation, in
its most effectual sense, from unconditional election |
13. Acknowledge then that you hold reprobation. Avow it
in the face of the sun. To be consistent with yourself, you must
openly assert, that “without reprobation this election cannot
stand.” You know it cannot. You know, if God hath fixed a
decree that these men only shall be saved, in such a decree it is
PREDESTINATION CALMLY CONSIDERED. 209
manifestly implied, that all other men shall be damned. If
God hath decreed that this part of mankind, and no more,
shall live eternally, you cannot but see it is therein decreed,
that the other part shall never see life. O let us deal
ingenuously with each other ! What we really hold, let us
openly profess. And if reprobation be the truth, it will bear
the light; for “the word of our God shall stand for ever.”
14. Now then, without any extenuation on the one hand,
or exaggeration on the other, let us look upon this doctrine,
call it what you please, naked and in its native colour. Before
the foundations of the world were laid, God of his own mere
will and pleasure fixed a decree concerning all the children of
men who should be born unto the end of the world. This
decree was unchangeable with regard to God, and irresistible
with regard to man. And herein it was ordained, that one
part of mankind should be saved from sin and hell, and all
the rest left to perish for ever and ever, without help, without
hope. That none of these should have that grace which
alone could prevent their dwelling with everlasting burnings,
God decreed, for this cause alone, “because it was his good
pleasure;” and for this end, “to show forth his glorious
power, and his sovereignty over all the earth.”
15. Now, can you, upon reflection, believe this? Perhaps
you will say, “I do not think about it.” That will never do.
You not only think about it, (though it may be confusedly,)
but speak about it too, whenever you speak of unconditional
election. You do not think about it ! What do you mean?
Do you never think about Esau or Pharaoh 7 or, in general,
about a certain number of souls whom alone God hath decreed
to save? Why, in that very thought reprobation lurks; it
entered your heart the moment that entered: It stays as
long as that stays; and you cannot speak that thought,
without speaking of reprobation. True, it is covered with
fig-leaves, so that a heedless eye may not observe it to be
there. But, if you narrowly observe, unconditional election
cannot appear without the cloven foot of reprobation.
16. “But do not the Scriptures speak of election? They say,
St. Paul was ‘an elected or chosen vessel; nay, and speak of
great numbers of men as ‘elect according to the foreknow
ledge of God.’ You cannot, therefore, deny there is such a
thing as election. And, if there is, what do you mean by it?”
I will tell you, in all plainness and simplicity. I believe
VOL. X. P
210 PREDESTINATION CALMLY CONSIDERED.
it commonly means one of these two things: First, a divine
appointment of some particular men, to do some particular
work in the world. And this election I believe to be not
only personal, but absolute and unconditional. Thus Cyrus
was elected to rebuild the temple, and St. Paul, with the
twelve, to preach the gospel. But I do not find this to have
any necessary connexion with eternal happiness. Nay, it is
plain it has not; for one who is elected in this sense may yet
be lost eternally. “Have I not chosen” (elected) “you
twelve?” saith our Lord; “yet one of you hath a devil.”
Judas, you see, was elected as well as the rest; yet is his lot
with the devil and his angels.
17. I believe election means, Secondly, a divine appoint
ment of some men to eternal happiness. But I believe this
election to be conditional, as well as the reprobation opposite
thereto. I believe the eternal decree concerning both is
expressed in those words: “He that believeth shall be saved;
he that believeth not shall be damned.” And this decree,
without doubt, God will not change, and man cannot resist.
According to this, all true believers are in Scripture termed
elect, as all who continue in unbelief are so long properly
reprobates, that is, unapproved of God, and without discern
ment touching the things of the Spirit.
18. Now, God, to whom all things are present at once, who
sees all eternity at one view, “calleth the things that are not
as though they were;” the things that are not yet as though
they were now subsisting. Thus he calls Abraham the “father
of many nations,” before even Isaac was born. And thus
Christ is called “the Lamb slain from the foundation of the
world;” though he was not slain, in fact, till some thousand
years after. In like manner, God calleth true believers, “elect
from the foundation of the world;” although they were not
actually elect, or believers, till many ages after, in their several
generations. Then only it was that they were actually elected,
when they were made the “sons of God by faith.” Then
were they, in fact, “chosen and taken out of the world; elect,”
saith St. Paul, “through belief of the truth;” or, as St. Peter
expresses it, “elect according to the foreknowledge of God,
through sanctification of the Spirit.”
19. This election I as firmly believe, as I believe the Scrip
ture to be of God. But unconditional election I cannot believe;
not only because I cannot find it in Scripture, but also (to
PREDESTINATION CALMLY CONSIDERED. 211
wave all other considerations) because it necessarily implies
unconditional reprobation. Find out any election which does
not imply reprobation, and I will gladly agree to it. But
reprobation I can never agree to while I believe the Scripture
to be of God; as being utterly irreconcilable to the whole
scope and tenor both of the Old and New Testament.
O that God would give me the desire of my heart | that he
would grant the thing which I long for ! even that your mind
might now be free and calm, and open to the light of his
Spirit ! that you would impartially consider how it is possible
to reconcile reprobation with the following Scriptures:
“Because thou hast eaten of the tree of which I commanded
thee, saying, Thou shalt not eat of it; in the sweat of thy face
shalt thou eat bread.” (Gen. iii. 17.) The curse shall come
on thee and thine offspring, not because of any absolute decree
of mine, but because of thy sin.
“If thou doest well, shalt thou not be accepted? And if
thou doest not well, sin lieth at the door.” (Gen. iv. 7.) Sin
only, not the decree of reprobation, hinders thy being accepted.
“Know that the Lord thy God, he is the faithful God,
which keepeth covenant and mercy with them that love him
and keep his commandments to a thousand generations; and
repayeth them that hate him to their face, to destroy them.
Wherefore, if ye hearken to these judgments, and keep, and
do them, the Lord thy God shall keep unto thee the covenant
which he sware unto thy fathers.” (Deut. vii. 9, 12.) “Behold,
I set before you this day a blessing and a curse; a blessing,
if you obey the commandments of the Lord your God; and
a curse, if you will not obey.” (xi. 26, 27, 28.) “See, I
have set before thee this day life and good, and death and
evil; in that I command thee this day to love the Lord
thy God, to walk in his ways, and to keep his command
ments, and the Lord thy God shall bless thee. But if thou
wilt not hear, I denounce unto you this day, that ye shall
surely perish. I call heaven and earth to record this day,
that I have set before you life and death, blessing and
cursing. Therefore, choose life, that both thou and thy seed
may live.” (xxx. 15, &c.)
“And the Spirit of God came upon Azariah, and he said,
The Lord is with you while ye be with him; and if ye seek
him, he will be found of you; but if ye forsake him, he will
forsake you.” (2 Chron. xv. 1, 2.)
P 2
212 PREDESTINATION CALMLY CONSIDERED.
“After all that is come upon us, for our evil deeds, and for
our great trespass; should we again break thy command
ments, wouldest thou not be angry with us, till thou hadst
consumed us?” (Ezra ix. 13, 14.)
“Behold, God is mighty, and despiseth not any.” (Job
xxxvi. 5.) Could he then reprobate any?
“The Lord is good to all: And his tender mercies are over
all his works.” (Psalm cKlv. 9.)
“Turn you at my reproof: Behold, I will pour out my
Spirit unto you. Because I have called, and ye refused;
I have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded: I also
will laugh at your calamity, I will mock when your fear cometh.
Then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer; they shall
seek me early, but they shall not find me.” (Prov. i. 23, &c.)
Why? because of my decree? No; but “because they hated
knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the Lord.”
“I have spread out my hands all the day unto a rebellious
people; a people that provoked me to anger continually to my
face. Therefore will I measure their former work into their
bosom. Ye shall all bow down to the slaughter; because when
I called, ye did not answer. Therefore, ye shall leave your
name for a curse unto my chosen; for the Lord God shall
slay thee, and call his servants by another name.” (Isaiah
lxv. 2, &c.)
“The soul that sinneth, it shall die. The son shall not
bear” (eternally) “the iniquity of the father, neither shall
the father bear the iniquity of the son. Have I any plea
sure at all that the wicked should die? saith the Lord;
and not that he should return from his ways, and live?”
(Ezek. xviii. 20, 23.)
“Every one that heareth these sayings of mine, and doeth
them not, shall be likened unto a foolish man, which built his
house upon the sand.” (Matt. vii. 26.) Nay, he could not
help it, if he was ordained thereto.
“Then began he to upbraid the cities wherein most of his
mighty works were done, because they repented not. Wo unto
thee, Chorazin! Wo unto thee, Bethsaida ! For if the mighty
works which were done in you, had been done in Tyre and
Sidon, they would have repented long ago in sackcloth and
ashes.” (What, if they were not elected? And if they of Beth
saida had been elected, would they not have repented too?)
“Therefore I say unto you, It shall be more tolerable for
PREDESTINATION CALMLY CONSIDERED. 213
Tyre and Sidon in the day of judgment than for you. And
thou, Capernaum, which art exalted unto heaven, shalt be
brought down to hell. For if the mighty works which have
been done in thee, had been done in Sodom, it would have
remained until this day. But I say unto you, It shall be
more tolerable for the land of Sodom in the day of judgment
than for thee.” (Matt. xi. 20, &c.)
“The men of Nineveh shall rise in judgment with this
generation, and shall condemn it: Because they repented at
the preaching of Jonas; and, behold, a greater than Jonas
is here.” (xii. 41.) But what was this to the purpose, if
the men of Nineveh were elected, and this generation of men
were not ?
“It is given unto you to know the mysteries of the king
dom of heaven, but unto them it is not given. For whosoever
hath,” (that is, uses what he hath,) “to him shall be given, and
he shall have more abundance: But whosoever hath not, from
him shall be taken away even that he hath.” (xiii. 11, 12.)
“They which were called were not worthy,” (xxii. 8) were
shut out from the marriage of the Lamb :—Why so? Because
“they would not come.” (Verse 3.)
The whole twenty-fifth chapter requires, and will reward,
your most serious consideration. If you can reconcile uncon
ditional reprobation with this, you may reconcile it with the
eighteenth of Ezekiel.
“This is the condemnation, that light is come into the
world, and men love” (or choose) “darkness rather than
light.” (John iii. 19.)
“How can ye believe, who receive honour one of another,
and seek not the honour that cometh of God?”. (v. 44.)
Observe the reason why they could not believe: It is not in
God, but in themselves.
“Thy money perish with thee!” (And so doubtless it
did.) “Thou hast neither part, nor lot in this matter; for
thy heart is not right in the sight of God. Repent therefore
of this thy wickedness, and pray God, if perhaps the thought
of thine heart may be forgiven thee.” (Acts viii. 20, &c.)
So that St. Peter had no thought of any absolute reprobation
even in the case of Simon Magus.
“They are without excuse; because when they knew God,
they glorified him not as God—wherefore God also gave them
up to uncleanness—who changed the truth of God into a lie.—
214 PREDESTINATION CALMLY CONSIDERED.
For this cause God gave them up to vile affections.—As they
did not like to retain God in their knowledge, God gave
them over to a reprobate mind, to do those things which are
not convenient.” (Rom. i. 20, &c.)
“Them that perish, because they received not the love of
the truth, that they might be saved. And for this cause God
shall send them strong delusion, to believe a lie; that they
all might be damned who believed not the truth, but had
pleasure in unrighteousness.” (2 Thess. ii. 10, &c.)
20. How will you reconcile reprobation with the following
scriptures, which declare God’s willingness that all should be
saved ?
“As many as ye shall find, bid” (invite) “to the marriage.”
(Matt. xxii. 9.)
“Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to every
creature.” (Mark xvi. 15.)
“And when he came near, he beheld the city, and wept
over it, saying, If” (rather, O that) “thou hadst known, at
least in this thy day, the things which belong unto thy
peace l” (Luke xix. 41, &c.)
“These things I say, that ye may be saved,” (John v. 34.)
viz., those who persecuted him, and “sought to slay him,”
(verse 16,) and of whom he complains, “Ye will not come
unto me, that ye may have life.” (Verse 40.)
“God that made the world and all things therein—giveth to
all life, and breath, and all things, and hath made of one blood
all nations of men, for to dwell on all the face of the earth—
That they should seek the Lord.” (Acts xvii. 24.) Observe,
this was God’s end in creating all nations on all the earth.
“As by the offence of one, judgment came upon all men
to condemnation; so by the righteousness of one the free gift
came upon all men unto justification of life.” (Rom. v. 18.)
“The same Lord over all is rich” (in mercy) “unto all that
call upon him.” (x.12.)
“This is good and acceptable in the sight of God our
Saviour; who willeth all men to be saved.” (1 Tim. ii. 3, 4.)
“Who is the Saviour of all men, especially of those that
believe;” (iv. 10;) that is, intentionally of all, and actually of
believers.
“If any man lack wisdom, let him ask of God, who giveth
to all men liberally, and upbraideth not.” (James i. 5.)
“The Lord is longsuffering toward us, not willing that any
PREDESTINATION CALMLY CONSIDERED, 215
should perish, but that all should come to repentance.”
(2 Peter iii. 9.)
“We have seen and do testify that the Father sent the
Son to be the Saviour of the world.” (1 John iv. 14.)
21. How will you reconcile reprobation with the following
scriptures, which declare that Christ came to save all men;
that he died for all; that he atoned for all, even for those
that finally perish?
“The Son of man is come to save that which is lost,”
(Matt. xviii. 11) without any restriction.
“Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin
of the world.” (John i. 29) “God sent his Son into the
world, that the world through him might be saved.” (iii. 17.)
“I came not ” (now) “to judge the world, but to save the
world.” (xii. 47.)
“Destroy not him with thy meat, for whom Christ died.”
(Rom. xiv. 15.)
“Through thy knowledge shall thy weak brother perish,
for whom Christ died.” (1 Cor. viii. 11.)
“We thus judge, that if one died for all, then were all
dead; and that he died for all, that those” (or all) “who live
should live unto Him which died for them.” (2 Cor. v. 14,
&c.) Here you see, not only that Christ died for all men,
but likewise the end of his dying for them.
“Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all.” (1 Tim.
ii. 6.)
“We see Jesus made lower than the angels, that he might
taste death for every man.” (Heb. ii. 9.)
“There shall be false teachers among you, who shall
privately bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord
that bought them, and bring upon themselves swift destruc
tion.” (2 Peter ii. 1.) You see he bought or redeemed even
those that perish, that bring upon themselves swift destruction.
“If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father,
Jesus Christ the righteous; and he is the propitiation for our
sins” (who are elect, according to the knowledge of God,)
“ and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole
world.” (1 John ii. 1, 2.)
You are sensible, these are but a very small part of the
scriptures which might be brought on each of these heads.
But they are enough; and they require no comment: Taken
in their plain, easy, and obvious sense, they abundantly prove,
216 PREDESTIN ATION CALMLY CONSIDERED.
that there is not, cannot be, any such thing as unconditional
reprobation.
22. But to be a little more particular: How can you
possibly reconcile reprobation with those scriptures that
declare the justice of God? To cite one for all:
“What mean ye that ye use this proverb, The fathers have
eaten sour grapes, and the children’s teeth are set on edge? As
I live, saith the Lord, ye shall not have occasion any more to
use this proverb in Israel. Behold, all souls are mine; as the
soul of the father, so the soul of the son is mine;” (and how
ever I may temporally visit the sins of the fathers upon the
children, yet this visitation extends no farther; but) “the soul
that sinneth, it shall die,” for its own sin, and not another's.
“But if a man be just, and do that which is lawful and right,
he shall surely live, saith the Lord God. If he beget a son
which is a robber, shall he then live? He shall not live,—he
shall surely die. Yet say ye, Why? doth not the son bear the
iniquity of the father?” (Temporally he doth, as in the case
of Achan, Korah, and a thousand others; but not eternally.)
“When the son hath done that which is lawful and right, he
shall surely live. The soul that sinneth, it shall die; ” shall
die the second death. “The son shall not bear the iniquity
of the father, neither shall the father bear the iniquity of the
son. The righteousness of the righteous shall be upon him,
and the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon him. Yet ye
say, The way of the Lord is not equal. Hear now, O Israel.
Is not my way equal?” (equitable, just?) “Are not your
ways unequal? When a righteous man turneth away from his
righteousness, and committeth iniquity, and dieth in them, for
his iniquity that he hath done shall he die. Again, when the
wicked man turneth away from his wickedness that he hath
committed, and doeth that which is lawful and right, he shall
save his soul alive. Therefore I will judge you, O house of
Israel, every one according to his ways, saith the Lord God.
Repent, and turn yourselves from all your transgressions.
So iniquity shall not be your ruin.” (Ezek. xviii. 2, &c.)
Through this whole passage God is pleased to appeal to
man himself touching the justice of His proceedings. And
well might he appeal to our own conscience, according to the
account of them which is here given. But it is an account
which all the art of man will never reconcile with uncon
ditional reprobation.
PREDESTINATION CALMLY CONSIDERED. 217
23. Do you think it will cut the knot to say, “Why, if
God might justly have passed by all men,” (speak out, “If
God might justly have reprobated all men,”—for it comes to
the same point,) “then he may justly pass by some : But
God might justly have passed by all men?” Are you sure he
might? Where is it written? I cannot find it in the word
of God. Therefore I reject it as a bold, precarious assertion,
utterly unsupported by Holy Scripture.
If you say, “But you know in your own conscience, God
might justly have passed by you:” I deny it. That God
might justly, for my unfaithfulness to his grace, have given
me up long ago, I grant : But this concession supposes me
to have had that grace which you say a reprobate never had.
But besides, in making this supposition, of what God
might have justly done, you suppose his justice might have
been separate from his other attributes, from his mercy in
particular. But this never was, nor ever will be; nor indeed
is it possible it should. All his attributes are inseparably
joined: They cannot be divided, no, not for a moment.
Therefore this whole argument stands, not only on an
unscriptural, but on an absurd, impossible supposition.
24. Do you say, “Nay, but it is just for God to pass by
whom he will, because of his sovereignty; for he saith himself,
‘May not I do what I will with my own?” and, ‘Hath not
the potter power over his own clay?’” I answer, The former
of these sentences stands in the conclusion of that parable,
(Matthew xx.) wherein our Lord reproves the Jews for murmur
ing at God’s giving the same reward to the Gentiles as to
them. To one of these murmurers it is that God says, “Friend,
I do thee no wrong. Take that thine is, and go thy way. I
will give unto this last even as unto thee.” Then follows:
“Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with mine own 2
Is thine eye evil, because I am good?” As if he had said,
“May I not give my own kingdom to whom I please? Art
thou angry because I am merciful?” It is then undeniably
clear, that God does not here assert a right of reprobating any
man. Here is nothing spoken of reprobation, bad or good.
Here is no kind of reference thereto. This text therefore has
nothing to do with the conclusion it was brought to prove.
25. But you add: “Hath not the potter power over his own
clay?” Let us consider the context of these words also.
They are found in the ninth chapter of the Epistle to the
218 IPREDESTINATION CALMLY CONSIDERED.
Romans; an Epistle, the general scope and intent of which is,
to publish the eternal, unchangeable a poisaig, purpose or
decree of God, “He that believeth, shall be saved: He that
believeth not shall be damned.” The justice of God in con
demning those that believed not, and the necessity of believing
in order to salvation, the Apostle proves at large in the three
first chapters, which he confirms in the fourth by the example
of Abraham. In the former part of the fifth and in the sixth
chapter, he describes the happiness and holiness of true believers.
(The latter part of the fifth is a digression, concerning the
extent of the benefits flowing from the death of Christ.) In
the seventh he shows in what sense believers in Christ are
delivered from the law; and describes the miserable bondage
of those who are still under the law; that is, who are truly
convinced of sin, but not able to conquer it. In the eighth
he again describes the happy liberty of those who truly believe
in Christ; and encourages them to suffer for the faith, as by
other considerations, so by this in particular, “We know that
all things work together for good to them that love God, to
them that are called” (by the preaching of his word) “accord
ing to his purpose,” (verse 28,) or decree, unalterably fixed
from eternity, “He that believeth shall be saved.” “For whom
he did foreknow” as believing, “he also did predestinate to
be conformed to the image of his Son. Moreover, whom he
did predestinate, them he also called,” by his word; (so that
term is usually taken in St. Paul’s Epistles;) “and whom he
called, them he also justified; ” (the word is here taken in its
widest sense, as including sanctification also ;) “and whom
he justified, them he glorified.” Thence to the end of the
chapter, he strongly encourages all those who had the love of
God shed abroad in their hearts, to have a good hope, that
no sufferings should ever “be able to separate them from the
love of God which is in Christ Jesus.”
26. But as the Apostle was aware how deeply the Jews
were offended at the whole tenor of his doctrine, and more
especially at his asserting, (1.) That the Jews themselves could
not be saved without believing in Jesus; and, (2.) That the
Heathens by believing in him might partake of the same
salvation; he spends the whole ninth chapter upon them;
wherein, (1.) He declares the tender love he had for them.
(Verses 1–3.) (2.) Allows the great national privileges they
enjoyed above any people under heaven. (Verses 4, 5.) (3.)
PREDESTINATION CALMLY CONSIDERED. 219
Answers their grand objection to his doctrine, taken from the
justice of God to their fathers. (Verses 6–13.) (4.) Removes
another objection, taken from the justice of God; interweaving
all along strong reproofs to the Jews, for priding themselves
on those privileges which were owing merely to the good
pleasure of God, not to their fathers’ goodness, any more than
their own. (Verses 14–23.) (5.) Resumes and proves by
Scripture his former assertion, that many Jews would be lost,
and many Heathens saved. (Verses 24–29.) And, lastly,
sums up the general drift of this chapter, and indeed of the
whole Epistle. “What shall we say then?” What is the
conclusion from the whole 7 the sum of all which has been
spoken? Why, that many Gentiles already partake of the
great salvation, and many Jews fall short of it. Wherefore?
Because they would not receive it by faith. And whosoever
believeth not, cannot be saved; whereas, “whosoever believeth
in Christ,” whether Jew or Gentile, “shall not be ashamed.”
(Verses 30–33.)
27. Those words, “Hath not the potter power over his own
clay?” are part of St. Paul's answer to that objection, That
it was unjust for God to show that mercy to the Gentiles
which he withheld from his own people. This he first simply
denies, saying, “God forbid!” And then observes, that,
according to his own words to Moses, God has a right to fix
the terms on which he will show mercy, which neither the
will nor the power of man can alter; (verses 15, 16;) and to
withdraw his mercy from them who, like Pharaoh, will not
comply with those terms. (Verse 17.) And that accordingly
“he hath mercy on whom he will have mercy,” namely,
those that truly believe; “ and whom he will,” namely,
obstinate unbelievers, he suffers to be “hardened.”
28. But “why then,” say the objectors, “doth he find
fault” with those that are hardened? “for who hath resisted
his will?” (Verse 19.) To this insolent misconstruction of
what he had said, the Apostle first gives a severe rebuke; and
then adds, “Shall the thing formed say unto him that formed
it, Why hast thou made me thus?” Why hast thou made
me capable of salvation only on those terms? None indeed
hath resisted this will of God. “He that believeth not, shall
be damned.” But is this any ground for arraigning his
justice? “Hath not” the great “Potter power over his own
clay? to make,” or appoint, one sort of “vessels,” namely,
220 PREDESTINATION CALM LY CONSIDERED.
believers, “to honour, and” the others “to dishonour?”
Hath he not a right to distribute eternal honour and dis
honour, on whatever terms he pleases? especially, considering
the goodness and patience he shows, even towards them that
believe not; considering that when they have provoked him
“to show his wrath, and to make the power” of his vengeance
“known, yet” he “endures, with much longsuffering,” even
those “vessels of wrath,” who had before “fitted” themselves
“to destruction.” There is then no more room to reply
against God, for making his vengeance known on those
vessels of wrath, than for “making known” his glorious love
“on the vessels of mercy whom he had before” by faith
“prepared for glory; even us, whom he hath called, not of
the Jews only, but also of the Gentiles.”
29. I have spoken more largely than I designed, in order to
show, that neither our Lord, in the above-mentioned parable,
nor St. Paul, in these words, had any view to God’s sovereign
power, as the ground of unconditional reprobation. And
beware you go no further therein, than you are authorized
by them. Take care, whenever you speak of these high things,
to “speak as the oracles of God.” And if so, you will never
speak of the sovereignty of God, but in conjunction with his
other attributes. For the Scripture nowhere speaks of this
single attribute, as separate from the rest. Much less does
it anywhere speak of the sovereignty of God as singly dis
posing the eternal states of men. No, no; in this awful
work, God proceeds according to the known rules of his
justice and mercy; but never assigns his sovereignty as the
cause why any man is punished with everlasting destruction.
30. Now then, are you not quite out of your way? You are
not in the way which God hath revealed. You are putting
eternal happiness and misery on an unscriptural and a very
dreadful footing. Make the case your own: Here are you,
a sinner, convinced that you deserve the damnation of hell.
Sorrow, therefore, and fear have filled your heart. And how
shall you be comforted? By the promises of God? But
perhaps you have no part therein; for they belong only to
the elect. By the consideration of his love and tender mercy?
But what are these to you, if you are a reprobate? God does
not love you at all; you, like Esau, he hath hated even from
eternity. What ground then can you have for the least
shadow of hope? Why, it is possible, (that is all,) that God’s
PREDESTINATION CALMLY CONS1 DERED. 221
sovereign will may be on your side. Possibly God may save
you, because he will ! O poor encouragement to despairing
sinners! I fear “faith” rarely “cometh by hearing” this!
31. The sovereignty of God is then never to be brought to
supersede his justice. And this is the present objection against
unconditional reprobation; (the plain consequence of uncondi
tional election;) it flatly contradicts, indeed utterly overthrows,
the Scripture account of the justice of God. This has been
proved in general already; let us now weigh a few particulars.
And, (1.) The Scripture describes God as the Judge of the
earth. But how shall God in justice judge the world? (O
consider this, as in the presence of God, with reverence and
godly fear !) How shall God in justice judge the world, if
there be any decree of reprobation? On this supposition, what
should those on the left hand be condemned for ? For their
having done evil? They could not help it. There never was
a time when they could have helped it. God, you say, “of old
ordained them to this condemnation.” And “who hath resisted
his will?” He “sold” them, you say, “to work wickedness,”
even from their mother's womb. He “gave them up to a
reprobate mind,” or ever they hung upon their mother's breast.
Shall he then condemn them for what they could not help?
Shall the Just, the Holy One of Israel, adjudge millions of
men to everlasting pain, because their blood moved in their
veins? Nay, this they might have helped, by putting an end
to their own lives. But could they even thus have escaped
from sin? Not without that grace which you suppose God
had absolutely determined never to give them. And yet you
suppose him to send them into eternal fire, for not escaping
from sin! that is, in plain terms, for not having that grace which
God had decreed they should never have ! O strange justice I
What a picture do you draw of the Judge of all the earth !
32. Are they not rather condemned for not doing good,
according to those solemn words of the great Judge, “Depart,
ye cursed; for I was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat; I
was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink; a stranger, and ye took
me not in ; I was naked, and ye clothed me not; sick, and in
prison, and ye visited me not. Then shall they answer.” But
how much better an answer do you put into their mouths |
Upon your supposition, might they not say, (O consider it well,
in meekness and fear !) “Lord, we might have done the out
ward work; but thou knowest it would have but increased
222 PREDESTINATION CALMLY CONSIDERED.
our damnation. We might have fed the hungry, given drink
to the thirsty, and covered the naked with a garment. But
all these works, without thy special grace, which we never had,
nor possibly could have, seeing thou hast eternally decreed to
withhold it from us, would only have been splendid sins.
They would only have heated the furnace of hell seven times
hotter than before.” Upon your supposition, might they not
say, “Righteous art thou, O Lord; yet let us plead with thee.
O, why dost thou condemn us for not doing good? Was it
possible for us to do anything well? Did we ever abuse the
power of doing good? We never received it, and that thou
knowest. Wilt thou, the Holy One, the Just, condemn us for
not doing what we never had the power to do? Wilt thou
condemn us for not casting down the stars from heaven? for
not holding the winds in our fist ? Why, it was as possible
for us to do this, as to do any work acceptable in thy sight !
O Lord, correct us, but with judgment And, before thou
plungest us into everlasting fire, let us know how it was ever
possible for us to escape the damnation of hell.”
33. Or, how could they have escaped (suppose you assign
that as the cause of their condemnation) from inward sin,
from evil desires, from unholy tempers and vile affections?
Were they ever able to deliver their own souls, to rescue
themselves from this inward hell? If so, their not doing it
might justly be laid to their charge, and would leave them
without excuse. But it was not so; they never were able to
deliver their own souls; they never had the power to rescue
themselves from the hands of these bosom enemies. This
talent was never put into their hands. How then can they
be condemned for hiding it in the earth, for non-improvement
of what they never had? Who is able to purify a corrupt
heart; to bring a clean thing out of an unclean? Is man,
mere man, sufficient for this? No, certainly. God alone. To
him only can the polluted of heart say, “Lord, if thou wilt,
thou canst make me clean.” But what, if he answer, “I will
not, because I will not : Be thou unclean still?” Will God
doom that man to the bottomless pit, because of that unclean
ness which he could not save himself from, and which God
could have saved him from, but would not? Verily, were an
earthly King to execute such justice as this upon his helpless
subjects, it might well be expected that the vengeance of the
Lord would soon sweep him from the face of the earth.
PREDESTINATION CALMLY CONSIDERED. 223
34. Perhaps you will say, They are not condemned for actual
but for original sin. What do you mean by this term? The
inward corruption of our nature? If so, it has been spoken of
before. Or do you mean, the sin which Adam committed in
paradise? That this is imputed to all men, I allow; yea, that
by reason hereof “the whole creation groaneth and travaileth
in pain together until now.” But that any will be damned
for this alone, I allow not, till you show me where it is
written. Bring me plain proof from Scripture, and I submit;
but till then I utterly deny it.
35. Should you not rather say, that unbelief is the damning
sin? and that those who are condemned in that day will be
therefore condemned, “because they believed not on the
name of the only-begotten Son of God?” But could they
believe? Was not this faith both the gift and the work of
God in the soul? And was it not a gift which he had
eternally decreed never to give them ? Was it not a work
which he was of old unchangeably determined never to work
in their souls P Shall these men be condemned, because God
would not work; because they did not receive what God
would not give? Could they “ungrasp the hold of his right
hand, or force omnipotence?”
36. There is, over and above, a peculiar difficulty here. You
say, Christ did not die for these men. But if so, there was
an impossibility, in the very nature of the thing, that they
should ever savingly believe. For what is saving faith, but
“a confidence in God through Christ, that loved me, and
gave himself for me?” Loved thee, thou reprobate gave
himself for thee! Away ! thou hast neither part nor lot herein.
Thou believe in Christ, thou accursed spirit ! damned or ever
thou wert born 1 There never was any object for thy faith;
there never was any thing for thee to believe. God himself,
(thus must you speak, to be consistent with yourself) with all
his omnipotence, could not make thee believe Christ atoned
for thy sins, unless he had made thee believe a lie.
37. If then God be just, there cannot, on your scheme, be
any judgment to come. We may add, nor any future state,
either of reward or punishment. If there be such a state,
God will therein “render to every man according to his
works. To them who by patient continuance in well-doing
seek for glory and honour and immortality, eternal life; but
to them that do not obey the truth, but obey unrighteousness,
224 PREDESTINATION CALMLY CONSIDERED.
indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish upon every
soul of man that doeth evil.”
But how is this reconcilable with your scheme? You say,
The reprobates cannot but do evil; and that the elect, from
the day of God's power, cannot but continue in well-doing.
You suppose all this is unchangeably decreed; in consequence
whereof, God acts irresistibly on the one, and Satan on the
other. Then it is impossible for either one or the other to
help acting as they do; or rather, to help being acted upon,
in the manner wherein they are. For if we speak properly,
neither the one nor the other can be said to act at all. Can
a stone be said to act, when it is thrown out of a sling? or a
ball, when it is projected from a cannon? No more can a
man be said to act, if he be only moved by a force he cannot
resist. But if the case be thus, you leave no room either
for reward or punishment. Shall the stone be rewarded for
rising from the sling, or punished for falling down? Shall
the cannon-ball be rewarded for flying towards the sun, or
punished for receding from it? As incapable of either punish
ment or reward is the man who is supposed to be impelled by
a force he cannot resist. Justice can have no place in reward
ing or punishing mere machines, driven to and fro by an
external force. So that your supposition of God’s ordaining
from etermity whatsoever should be done to the end of the
world; as well as that of God’s acting irresistibly in the elect,
and Satan’s acting irresistibly in the reprobates; utterly over
throws the Scripture doctrine of rewards and punishments,
as well as of a judgment to come.
38. Thus ill does that election which implies reprobation
agree with the Scripture account of God’s justice. And does
it agree any better with his truth? How will you reconcile it
with those plain passages?—“Have I any pleasure at all
that the wicked should die, saith the Lord God; and not that
he should return from his ways and live? Cast away from
you all your transgressions whereby ye have transgressed: For
why will ye die, O house of Israel? For I have no pleasure
in the death of him that dieth, saith the Lord: Wherefore,
turn yourselves, and live ye.” (Ezek. xviii. 23, &c.)
“As I live, saith the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the
death of the wicked; but that the wicked turn from his way
and live. Turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways: For why
will ye die, O house of Israel?” (Ezek. xxxiii. 11.)
PREDESTINATION CALMLY CONSIDERED. 225
39. But perhaps you will say, “These ought to be limited
and explained by other passages of Scripture; wherein, this.
doctrine is as clearly affirmed, as it is denied in these.” I
must answer very plain: If this were true, we must give up
all the Scriptures together; nor would the Infidels allow the
Bible so honourable a title as that of a “cunningly-devised
fable.” But it is not true. It has no colour of truth. It is
absolutely, notoriously false. To tear up the very roots of
reprobation, and of all doctrines that have a necessary con
nexion therewith, God declares in his word these three things,
and that explicitly, in so many terms: (1) “Christ died for
all,” (2 Cor. v. 14) namely, all that were dead in sin, as the
words immediately following fix the sense: Here is the fact
affirmed. (2.) “He is the propitiation for the sins of the whole
world,” (1 John ii. 2) even of all those for whom he died:
Here is the consequence of his dying for all. And, (3) “He
died for all, that they should not live unto themselves, but
unto Him which died for them,” (2 Cor. v. 15,) that they might
be saved from their sins: Here is the design, the end of his
dying for them. Now, show me the scriptures wherein God
declares in equally express terms, (1.) “Christ” did not die “for
all,” but for some only. (2.) Christ is not “the propitiation
for the sins of the whole world;” and, (3) “He” did not die
“for all,” at least, not with that intent, “that they should live
unto him who died for them.” Show me, I say, the scriptures
that affirm these three things in equally express terms. You
know there are none. Nor is it possible to evade the force of
those above recited, but by supplying in number what is
wanting in weight; by heaping abundance of texts together,
whereby (though none of them speak home to the point) the
patrons of that opinion dazzle the eyes of the unwary, and
quite overlay the understanding both of themselves and those
that hear them.
40. To proceed: What an account does this doctrine give
of the sincerity of God in a thousand declarations, such as
these?—“O that there were such an heart in them, that they
would fear me, and keep my commandments always, that it
might be well with them, and with their children for ever!”
(Deut. v. 29.) “My people would not hear my voice, and
Israel would not obey me. So I gave them up unto their own
hearts' lusts, and let them follow their own imaginations. O
that my people would have hearkened unto me! For if Israel
WOL. X. Q
226 PREDESTINATION CALM LY CONSIDERED.
had walked in my ways, I should soon have put down their
enemies, and turned my hand against their adversaries.”
(Psalm lxxxi. 11, &c.) And all this time, you suppose God
had unchangeably ordained, that there never should be “such
an heart in them !” that it never should be possible for the
people whom he thus seemed to lament over, to hearken unto
him, or to walk in his ways!
How clear and strong is the reasoning of Dr. Watts on this
head “It is very hard indeed, to vindicate the sincerity of
the blessed God or his Son, in their universal offers of grace
and salvation to men, and their sending Ministers with such
messages and invitations to accept of mercy, if there be not
at least a conditional pardon and salvation provided for them.
“His Ministers indeed, as they know not the event of things,
may be sincere in offering salvation to all persons, according
to their general commission, “Go ye into all the world, and
preach the gospel to every creature. But how can God or
Christ be sincere in sending them with this commission, to
offer his grace to all men, if God has not provided such grace
for all men, no, not so much as conditionally?
“It is hard to suppose, that the great God, who is truth
itself, and faithful in all his dealings, should call upon dying
men to trust in a Saviour for eternal life, when this Saviour
has not eternal life intrusted with him to give them if they do
as he requires. It is hard to conceive how the great Governor
of the world can be sincere in inviting sinners, who are on the
brink of hell, to cast themselves upon an empty word of invi
tation, a mere shadow and appearance of support, if there be
nothing real to bear them up from those deeps of destruction,
nothing but mere words and empty invitations ! Can we
think, that the righteous and holy God would encourage his
Ministers to call them to leave and rest the weight of their
immortal concerns upon a gospel, a covenant of grace, a
Mediator, and his merit and righteousness? all which are a
mere nothing with regard to them, a heap of empty names,
an unsupporting void which cannot uphold them ?”
41. Our blessed Lord does indisputably command and invite
“all men every where to repent.” He calleth all. He sends
his ambassadors, in his name, to “preach the gospel to every
creature.” He himself “preached deliverance to the captives,”
without any hint of restriction or limitation. But now, in what
manner do you represent him, while he is employed in this
PREDESTINATION CALMLY CONSIDERED. 227
work? You suppose him to be standing at the prison-doors,
having the keys thereof in his hands, and to be continually
inviting the prisoners to come forth, commanding them to
accept of that invitation, urging every motive which can
possibly induce them to comply with that command; adding
the most precious promises, if they obey, the most dreadful
threatenings, if they obey not; and all this time you suppose
him to be unalterably determined in himself never to open
the doors for them ! even while he is crying, “Come ye, come
ye, from that evil place: For why will ye die, O house of
Israel!” “Why l’’ might one of them reply, “because we
cannot help it. We cannot help ourselves; and thou wilt
not help us. It is not in our power to break the gates of
brass, and it is not thy pleasure to open them. Why will we
die! We must die; because it is not thy will to save us.”
Alas! my brethren, what kind of sincerity is this, which you
ascribe to God our Saviour?
42. So ill do election and reprobation agree with the truth
and sincerity of God! But do they not agree least of all
with the scriptural account of his love and goodness? that
attribute which God peculiarly claims, wherein he glories
above all the rest. It is not written, “God is justice,” or
“God is truth:” (Although he is just and true in all his
ways:) But it is written, “God is love,” love in the abstract,
without bounds; and “there is no end of his goodness.” His
love extends even to those who neither love nor fear him.
He is good, even to the evil and the unthankful; yea, without
any exception or limitation, to all the children of men. For
“ the Lord is loving” (or good) “to every man, and his
mercy is over all his works.”
But how is God good or loving to a reprobate, or one that is
not elected? (You may choose either term: For if none but
the unconditionally elect are saved, it comes precisely to the
same thing.) You cannot say, he is an object of the love or
goodness of God, with regard to his eternal state, whom he
created, says Mr. Calvin plainly and fairly, in vitae contume
liam et mortis exitium, “to live a reproach, and die ever
lastingly.” Surely, no one can dream, that the goodness of God
is at all concerned with this man’s eternal state. “However,
God is good to him in this world.” What when by reason
of God’s unchangeable decree, it had been good for this man
never to have been born? when his very birth was a curse,
Q 2
228 PREDESTINATION CALM LY CONSIDERED.
not a blessing? “Well, but he now enjoys many of the
gifts of God, both gifts of nature and of providence. He has
food and raiment, and comforts of various kinds. And are
not all these great blessings?” No, not to him. At the price
he is to pay for them, every one of these also is a curse.
Every one of these comforts is, by an eternal decree, to cost
him a thousand pangs in hell. For every moment’s pleasure
which he now enjoys, he is to suffer the torments of more than
a thousand years; for the smoke of that pit which is preparing
for him ascendeth up for ever and ever. God knew this
would be the fruit of whatever he should enjoy, before the
vapour of life fled away. He designed it should. It was his
very purpose, in giving him those enjoyments. So that, by
all these, (according to your account,) he is, in truth and
reality, only fatting the ox for the slaughter. “Nay, but
God gives him grace too.” Yes; but what kind of grace?
Saving grace, you own, he has none; none of a saving nature.
And the common grace he has was not given with any
design to save his soul; nor with any design to do him any
good at all; but only to restrain him from hurting the elect.
So far from doing him good, that this grace also necessarily
increases his damnation. “And God knows this,” you say,
“ and designed it should; it was one great end for which he
gave it!” Then I desire to know, how is God good or loving
to this man, either with regard to time or eternity?
43. Let us suppose a particular instance: Here stands a
man who is reprobated from all eternity; or, if you would
express it more smoothly, one who is not elected, whom God
eternally decreed to pass by. Thou hast nothing therefore to
expect from God after death, but to be cast into the lake of fire
burning with brimstone; God having consigned thy unborn
soul to hell, by a decree which cannot pass away. And from
the time thou wast born under the irrevocable curse of God,
thou canst have no peace. For there is no peace to the wicked;
and such thou art doomed to continue, even from thy mother’s
womb. Accordingly, God giveth thee of this world’s goods,
on purpose to enhance thy damnation. He giveth thee now
substance or friends, in order hereafter to heap the more coals
of fire upon thy head. He filleth thee with food, he maketh
thee fat and well liking, to make thee a more specious sacrifice
to his vengeance. Good nature, generosity, a good under
standing, various knowledge, it may be, or eloquence, are the
PREDESTINATION CALMLY CONSIDERED. 229
flowers wherewith he adorneth thee, thou poor victim, before
thou art brought to the slaughter. Thou hast grace too !
but what grace? Not saving grace. That is not for thee,
but for the elect only. Thine may properly be termed,
damning grace; since it is not only such in the event, but in
the intention. Thou receivedst it of God for that very end,
that thou mightest receive the greater damnation. It was
given, not to convert thee, but only to convince; not to make
thee without sin, but without excuse; not to destroy but to
arm the worm that never dieth, and to blow up the fire that
never shall be quenched.
44. Now, I beseech you to consider calmly, how is God good
or loving to this man? Is not this such love as makes your
blood run cold P as causes the ears of him that heareth to
tingle 7 And can you believe there is that man on earth or in
hell, who can truly tell God, “Thus hast thou done?” Can
you think, that the loving, the merciful God, ever dealt thus
with any soul which he hath made? But you must and do
believe this, if you believe unconditional election. For it
holds reprobation in its bosom; they never were, never can be,
divided. Take then your choice. If, for the sake of election,
you will swallow reprobation, well. But if you cannot digest
this, you must necessarily give up unconditional election.
45. “But you cannot do this; for then you should be
called a Pelagian, an Arminian, and what not.” And are
you afraid of hard names? Then you have not begun to be
a disciple of Jesus Christ. “No, that is not the case. But
you are afraid, if you do not hold election, you must hold
free-will, and so rob God of his glory in man’s salvation.”
I answer, (1.) Many of the greatest maintainers of election
utterly deny the consequence, and do not allow, that even
natural free-will in man is repugnant to God’s glory. These
accordingly assert, that every man living has a measure of
natural free-will. So the Assembly of Divines, (and therein the
body of Calvinists both in England and Scotland,) “God hath
endued the will of man with that natural liberty that is neither
forced, nor, by an absolute necessity of nature, determined to
do good or evil:” (Chap. ix.) And this they assert of man
in his fallen state even before he receives the grace of God.
But I do not carry free-will so far: (I mean, not in moral
things:) Natural free-will, in the present state of mankind, I do
not understand: I only assert, that there is a measure of free
230 PREDESTINATION CALM LY CONSIDERED.
will supernaturally restored to every man, together with that
supernatural light which “enlightens every man that cometh
into the world.” But indeed, whether this be natural or no,
as to your objection it matters not. For that equally lies
against both, against any free-will of any kind; your assertion
being thus, “If man has any free-will, God cannot have the
whole glory of his salvation;” or, “It is not so much for the
glory of God, to save man as a free agent, put into a capacity
of concurring with his grace on the one hand, and of resist
ing it on the other; as to save him in the way of a necessary
agent, by a power which he cannot possibly resist.”
46. With regard to the former of these assertions, “If
man has any free-will, then God cannot have the whole glory
of his salvation,” is your meaning this: “If man has any
power to ‘work out his own salvation, then God cannot have
the whole glory?” If it be, I must ask again, What do you
mean by God’s “having the whole glory?” Do you mean,
“His doing the whole work, without any concurrence on
man’s part?” If so, your assertion is, “If man do at all
‘work together with God,” in ‘working out his own salva
tion, then God does not do the whole work, without man’s
‘working together with Him.’” Most true, most sure: But
cannot you see, how God nevertheless may have all the
glory? Why, the very power to “work together with Him”
was from God. There'ore to Him is all the glory. Has not
even experience taught you this? Have you not often felt,
in a particular temptation, power either to resist or yield to
the grace of God? And when you have yielded to “work
together with Him,” did you not find it very possible, not
withstanding, to give him all the glory? So that both
experience and Scripture are against you here, and make it
clear to every impartial inquirer, that though man has free
dom to work or not “work together with God,” yet may
God have the whole glory of his salvation.
47. If then you say, “We ascribe to God alone the whole
glory of our salvation;” I answer, So do we too. If you add,
“Nay, but we affirm, that God alone does the whole work,
without man’s working at all;” in one sense, we allow this
also. We allow, it is the work of God alone to justify, to
sanctify, and to glorify; which three comprehend the whole
of salvation. Yet we cannot allow, that man can only resist,
and not in any wise “work together with God;” or that God
PREDESTINATION CALM LY CONSIDERED. 231
is so the whole worker of our salvation, as to exclude man’s
working at all. This I dare not say; for I cannot prove it by
Scripture; nay, it is flatly contrary thereto; for the Scripture is
express, that (having received power from God) we are to “work
out our own salvation;” and that (after the work of God is
begun in our souls) we are “workers together with Him.”
48. Your objection, proposed in another form, is this: “It
is not so much for the glory of God, to save man as a free
agent, put into a capacity of either concurring with, or
resisting, his grace; as to save him in the way of a necessary
agent, by a power which he cannot possibly resist.”
O that the Lord would answer for himself! that he would
arise and maintain his own cause ! that he would no longer
suffer his servants, few as they are, to weaken one another’s
hands, and to be wearied not only with the “contradiction
of sinners,” but even of those who are in a measure saved
from sin “Woe is me, that I am constrained to dwell with
Meshech! among them that are enemies to peace | I labour
for peace; but when I speak thereof, they still make
themselves ready for battle.”
49. If it must be, then, let us look one another in the face.
How is it more for the glory of God to save man irresistibly,
than to save him as a free agent, by such grace as he may
either concur with or resist? I fear you have a confused,
unscriptural notion of “the glory of God.” What do you
mean by that expression? The glory of God, strictly speak
ing, is his glorious essence and his attributes, which have
been ever of old. And this glory admits of no increase,
being the same yesterday, to-day, and for ever. But the
Scripture frequently speaks of the glory of God, in a sense
something different from this; meaning thereby, the mani
festation of his essential glory, of his eternal power and
godhead, and of his glorious attributes, more especially his
justice, mercy, and truth. And it is in this sense alone that
the glory of God is said to be advanced by man. Now then,
this is the point which it lies on you to prove: “That it does
more eminently manifest the glorious attributes of God, more
especially his justice, mercy, and truth, to save man irresist
ibly, than to save him by such grace as it is in his power
either to concur with, or to resist.”
50. But you must not imagine I will be so unwise as to
engage you here on this single point. I shall not now dispute
232 PREDESTINATION CALMLY CONSIDERED.
(which yet might be done) whether salvation by irresistible
grace, (which indeed makes man a mere machine, and, conse
quently, no more rewardable and punishable,) whether, I
say, salvation by irresistible grace, considered apart from its
consequences, manifest the glory of God more or less than
salvation by grace which may be resisted. Not so; but, by
the assistance of God, I shall take your whole scheme toge
ther; irresistible grace for the elect, implying the denial of
saving grace to all others; or unconditional election with its
inseparable companion, unconditional reprobation.
The case is clearly this: You may drive me, on the sone
hand, unless I will contradict myself, or retract my principles,
to own a measure of free-will in every man; (though not by
nature, as the Assembly of Divines;) and, on the other hand,
I can drive you, and every assertor of unconditional election,
unless you will contradict yourself, or retract your principles,
to own unconditional reprobation.
Stand forth, then, free-will on the one side, and reproba
tion on the other; and let us see whether the one scheme,
attended with the absurdity, as you think it, of free-will, or
the other scheme, attended with the absurdity of reprobation,
be the more defensible. Let us see (if it please the Father
of Lights to open the eyes of our understanding) which of
these is more for the glory of God, for the display of his
glorious attributes, for the manifestation of his wisdom,
justice, and mercy, to the sons of men.
51. First, his wisdom. If man be in some measure free;
if, by that light which “lighteneth every man that comes
into the world,” there be “set before him life and death, good
and evil;” then how gloriously does the manifold wisdom of
God appear in the whole economy of man’s salvation Being
willing that all men should be saved, yet not willing to force
them thereto; willing that men should be saved, yet not as
trees or stones, but as men, as reasonable creatures, endued
with understanding to discern what is good, and liberty either
to accept or refuse it; how does he suit the whole scheme of
his dispensations to this his a poisaig, his plan, “the counsel of
his will!” His first step is to enlighten the understanding by
that general knowledge of good and evil. To this he adds
many secret reproofs, if they act contrary to this light; many
inward convictions, which there is not a man on earth who
has not often felt. At other times he gently moves their
PREDESTINATION CALMLY CONSIDERED. 233
wills, he draws and woos them, as it were, to walk in the light.
He instils into their hearts good desires, though perhaps they
know not from whence they come. Thus far he proceeds with
all the children of men, yea, even with those who have not
the knowledge of his written word. But in this, what a field
of wisdom is displayed, suppose man to be in some degree a
free agent How is every part of it suited to this end to
save man, as man; to set life and death before him, and then
persuade (not force) him to choose life. According to this
grand purpose of God, a perfect rule is first set before him, to
serve as a “lantern to his feet, and a light in all his paths.”
This is offered to him in a form of a law, enforced with the
strongest sanctions, the most glorious rewards for them that
obey, the severest penalties on them that break it. To reclaim
these, God uses all manner of ways; he tries every avenue of
their souls. He applies sometimes to their understanding,
showing them the folly of their sins; sometimes to their affec
tions, tenderly expostulating with them for their ingratitude,
and even condescending to ask, “What could I have done for”
you (consistent with my eternal purpose, not to force you)
“which I have not done?” He intermixes sometimes threats,
—“Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish;” sometimes
promises,—“Your sins and your iniquities will I remember no
more.” Now, what wisdom is seen in all this, if man may
indeed choose life or death ! But if every man be unalterably
consigned to heaven or hell before he comes from his mother's
womb, where is the wisdom of this; of dealing with him, in
every respect, as if he were free, when it is no such thing?
What avails, what can this whole dispensation of God avail a
reprobate? What are promises or threats, expostulations or
reproofs to thee, thou firebrand of hell? What, indeed, (O my
brethren, suffer me to speak, for I am full of matter!) but
empty farce, but mere grimace, sounding words, that mean
just nothing? O where (to wave all other considerations now)
is the wisdom of this proceeding ! To what end does all this
apparatus serve? If you say, “To insure his damnation;”
alas, what needeth that, seeing this was insured before the
foundation of the world! Let all mankind then judge, which
of these accounts is more for the glory of God’s wisdom !
52. We come next to his justice. Now, if man be capable of
choosing good or evil, then he is a proper object of the justice
of God, acquitting or condemning, rewarding or punishing.
234 PREDESTINATION CALMLY CONSIDERED.
But otherwise he is not. A mere machine is not capable of
being either acquitted or condenned. Justice cannot punish
a stone for falling to the ground; mor, on your scheme, a man
for falling into sin. For he can no more help it than the stone,
if he be, in your sense, fore-ordained to this condemnation.
Why does this man sin? “He cannot cease from sin.” Why
cannot he cease from sin “Because he has no saving grace.”
Why has he no saving grace? “Because God, of his own good
pleasure, hath eternally decreed not to give it him.” Is he
then under an unavoidable necessity of sinning? “Yes, as
much as a stone is of falling. He never had any more power
to cease from evil, than a stone has to hang in the air.” And
shall this man, for not doing what he never could do, and for
doing what he never could avoid, be sentenced to depart into
everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels? “Yes,
because it is the sovereign will of God.” Then “you have
either found a new God, or made one !” This is not the God
of the Christians. Our God is just in all his ways; he reapeth
not where he hath not strewed. He requireth only according
to what he hath given; and where he hath given little, little is
required. The glory of his justice is this, to “reward every
man according to his works.” Hereby is that glorious attri
bute shown, evidently set forth before men and angels, in that
it is accepted of every man according to that he hath, and not
according to that he hath not. This is that just decree which
cannot pass, either in time or in eternity.
Thus one scheme gives the justice of God its full scope,
leaves room for it to be largely displayed in all its branches;
whereas the other makes it a mere shadow; yea, brings it
absolutely to nothing.
53. Just as gloriously does it display his love; supposing it
to be fixed on one in ten of his creatures, (might I not rather
say, on one in a hundred?) and to have no regard to the rest.
Let the ninety-and-nine reprobates perish without mercy. It
is enough for him, to love and save the one elect. But why
will he have mercy on these alone, and leave all those to
inevitable destruction? “He will—because he will!” O that
God would give unto you who thus speak, meekness of wisdom!
Then, would I ask, What would the universal voice of man
kind pronounce of the man that should act thus? that being
able to deliver millions of men from death with a single breath
of his mouth, should refuse to save any more than one in a
PREDESTINATION CALMLY CONSIDERED. 235
hundred, and say, “I will not, because I will not l” How
then do you exalt the mercy of God, when you ascribe such
a proceeding to him? What a strange comment is this on
his own word, that “his mercy is over all his works l”
Do you think to evade this by saying, “His mercy is more
displayed, in irresistibly saving the elect, than it would be in
giving the choice of salvation to all men, and actual salvation
to those that accepted it?” How so? Make this appear if
you can. What proof do you bring of this assertion? I
appeal to every impartial mind, whether the reverse be not
obviously true; whether the mercy of God would not be far
less gloriously displayed, in saving a few by his irresistible
power, and leaving all the rest without help, without hope, to
perish everlastingly, than in offering salvation to every crea
ture, actually saving all that consent thereto, and doing for
the rest all that infinite wisdom, almighty power, and bound
less love can do, without forcing them to be saved, which
would be to destroy the very nature that he had given them.
I appeal, I say, to every impartial mind, and to your own, if
not quite blinded with prejudice, which of these accounts
places the mercy of God in the most advantageous light.
54. Perhaps you will say, “But there are other attributes
of God, namely, his sovereignty, unchangeableness, and faith
fulness. I hope you do not deny these.” I answer, No; by
no means. The sovereignty of God appears, (1.) In fixing
from eternity that decree touching the sons of men, “He that
believeth shall be saved: He that believeth not shall be
damned.” (2.) In all the general circumstances of creation;
in the time, the place, the manner of creating all things; in
appointing the number and kinds of creatures, visible and
invisible. (3.) In allotting the naturalendowments of men, these
to one, and those to another. (4.) In disposing the time, place,
and other outward circumstances (as parents, relations) attend
ing the birth of every one. (5.) In dispensing the various gifts
of his Spirit, for the edification of his Church. (6.) In ordering
all temporal things, as health, fortune, friends, every thing
short of eternity. But in disposing the eternal states of men,
(allowing only what was observed under the first article,) it is
clear, that not sovereignty alone, but justice, mercy, and truth
hold the reins. The Governor of heaven and earth, the IAM,
over all, God blessed for ever, takes no step here but as these
direct, and prepare the way before his face. This is his eternal
236 PREDESTINATLON CALMLY CONSIDERED.
and irresistible will, as he hath revealed unto us by his Spirit;
declaring in the strongest terms, adding his oath to his word,
and, because he could swear by no greater, swearing by him
self, “As I live, saith the Lord God, I have no pleasure in
the death of him that dieth.” The death of him that dieth
can never be resolved into my pleasure or sovereign will.
No; it is impossible. We challenge all mankind, to bring
one clear, scriptural proof to the contrary. You can bring no
scripture proof that God ever did, or assertion that he ever
will, act as mere sovereign in eternally condemning any soul
that ever was or will be born into the world.
55. Now, you are probably thinking of Esau and Pharaoh.
Do you then set it down as an unquestionable truth, that
these were eternally condemned by the mere sovereign will of
God? Are you sure that they were eternally condemned?
Even that point is not altogether certain. It is nowhere asserted
in holy writ; and it would cost you some pains to prove it.
It is true, Pharaoh’s death was a punishment from God; but
it does not follow, that he was punished everlastingly. And
if he was, it was not by the mere sovereign will of God, but
because of his own stubbornness and impenitence.
Of this Moses has given us a particular account: Accordingly
we read, “When Pharaoh saw that there was respite,” (after
he was delivered from the plague of frogs,) “he hardened his
heart, and hearkened not unto them.” (Exod. viii. 15.) So after
the plague of flies, “Pharaoh hardened his heart at this time
also, neither would he let the people go.” (Verse 32.) Again:
“When Pharaoh saw that the rain and the hail were ceased,
he sinned yet more, and hardened his heart, he and his
servants.” (ix. 34.) After God had given him all this space to
repent, and had expostulated with him for his obstinate impeni
tence, in those solemn words, “How long wilt thou refuse to
humble thyself before me?” (x. 3;) what wonder is it, if God
then “hardened his heart,” that is, permitted Satan to harden
it? if he at length wholly withdrew his softening grace, and
“gave him up to a reprobate mind?”
56. The case of Esau is widely different from this;
although his conduct also is blamable in many points. The
first was, the selling his birth-right to Jacob. (Gen. xxv.
31, &c.) The next, his marrying against his father’s consent.
(xxvi. 34, 35.) But it is highly probable he was sensible
of his fault; because Isaac appears to have been fully recon
PREDESTINATION CALMLY CONSIDERED. 237
ciled to him when he said, “My son, make me savoury meat,
that my soul may bless thee before I die.” (xxvii. 4.)
In the following verses we have an account of the manner
wherein he was supplanted by his brother Jacob. Upon
Isaac's relation of this, “Esau cried with a great and
exceeding bitter cry, and said unto his father, Bless me, even
me also, O my father !” (Verse 34.) But “he found no place,”
says the Apostle, “for repentance,” for recovering the blessing,
“though he sought it carefully with tears.” “Thy brother,”
said Isaac, “hath taken away thy blessing: I have blessed
him, yea, and he shall be blessed.” So that all Esau’s
sorrow and tears could not recover his birth-right, and the
blessing annexed thereto.
And yet there is great reason to hope, that Esau (as well as
Jacob) is now in Abraham’s bosom. For although for a time
“he hated Jacob,” and afterward came against him “with
four hundred men,” very probably designing to take revenge
for the injuries he had sustained; yet we find, when they met,
“Esau ran and embraced him, and fell on his neck and kissed
him.” So throughly had God changed his heart! And why
should we doubt but that happy change continued?
57. You can ground no solid objection to this on St. Paul's
words in the Epistle to the Romans: “It was said unto her,
The elder shall serve the younger. As it is written, Jacob
have I loved, but Esau have I hated.” (ix. 12, 13.) For it is
undeniably plain, that both these scriptures relate, not to the
persons of Jacob and Esau, but to their descendants; the
Israelites sprung from Jacob, and the Edomites sprung from
Esau. In this sense only did “the elder” (Esau) “serve the
younger;” not in his person, (for Esau never served Jacob,)
but in his posterity. The posterity of the elder brother
served the posterity of the younger.
The other text referred to by the Apostle runs thus: “I
loved Jacob, and I hated Esau, and laid his mountains and his
heritage waste for the dragons of the wilderness.” (Mal. i. 2, 3.)
Whose heritage was it that God laid waste? Not that which
Esau personally enjoyed; but that of his posterity, the Edom
ites, for their enormous sins, largely described by several of the
Prophets. So neither here is there any instance of any man
being finally condemned by the mere sovereign will of God.
58. The unchangeableness of God, we allow likewise. “In
Him is no variableness, neither shadow of turning.” But you
238 PREDESTINATION CALMLY CONSIDERED.
seem to lie under a mistake concerning this also, for want of
observing the scripture account of it. The Scripture teaches,
(1.) That God is unchangeable with regard to his decrees.
But what decrees? The same that he has commanded to be
preached to every creature: “He that believeth shall be saved;
he that believeth not shall be damned.” The Scripture
teaches, (2.) That God is unchangeable with regard to his
love and hatred. But how? Observe this well; for it is your
grand mistake, and the root of almost all the rest. God
unchangeably loveth righteousness, and hateth iniquity.
Unchangeably he loveth faith, and unchangeably hateth
unbelief. In consequence hereof he unchangeably loves the
righteous, and hateth the workers of iniquity. He unchange
ably loves them that believe, and hates wilful, obstinate unbe
lievers. So that the scripture account of God’s unchangeable
ness with regard to his decrees, is this: He has unchangeably
decreed to save holy believers, and to condemn obstinate,
impenitent unbelievers. And according to Scripture, his
unchangeableness of affection properly and primarily regards
tempers and not persons; and persons (as Enoch, Noah,
Abraham) only as those tempers are found in them. Let then
the unchangeableness of God be put upon the right foot; let
the Scripture be allowed to fix the objects of it, and it will
as soon prove transubstantiation, as unconditional election.
59. The faithfulness of God may be termed a branch of his
truth. He will perform what he hath promised. But then let
us inquire of the oracles of God, To whom are the promises
made? the promises of life and immortality? The answer is,
“To Abraham and his seed;” that is, to those who “walk in
the steps of that faith of their father Abraham.” To those
who believe, as believers, are the gospel promises made. To
these hath the faithful God engaged, that he will do what he
hath spoken. “He will fulfil his covenant and promise which
he hath made to a thousand generations:” The sum of which
is, (as we find it expressly declared by the Spirit of God,)
“The Lord will give grace” (more grace) “and glory; and no
good thing will he withhold from them that live a godly life.”
60. This covenant of God I understand; but I have heard
of another which I understand not. I have heard, “that God
the Father made a covenant with his Son, before the world
began, wherein the Son agreed to suffer such and such
things, and the Father to give him such and such souls for a
PREDESTINATION C.Y.LMLY CONSIDERED. 239
recompence; that in consequence of this, those souls must be
saved, and those only, so that all others must be damned.”
I beseech you, where is this written ? In what part of Scrip
ture is this covenant to be found? We may well expect a
thing of this moment to be revealed very expressly, with the
utmost clearness and solemnity. But where is this done?
And if it is not done, if there is no such account in all the
Bible; which shall we wonder at most, that any serious man
should advance, or that thousands should believe, so strange
an assertion, without one plain text of Scripture to support
it, from Genesis to the Revelation?
61. I suppose you do not imagine that the bare word cove
nant, if it occurred ever so often in holy writ, is a proof of any
such covenant as this. The grand covenant which we allow
to be mentioned therein, is a covenant between God and man,
established in the hands of a Mediator, “who tasted death for
every man,” and thereby purchased it for all the children of
men. The tenor of it (so often mentioned already) is this:
“Whosoever believeth unto the end, so as to show his faith
by his works, I the Lord will reward that soul eternally.
But whosoever will not believe, and consequently dieth in his
sins, I will punish him with everlasting destruction.”
62. To examine throughly whether this covenant between
God and man be unconditional or conditional, it may be
needful to go back as far as Abraham, the father of the
faithful; to inquire what manner of covenant it was which
God made with him; and whether any reason be assigned of
God’s peculiarly blessing Abraham, and all the nations of the
earth in him.
The first mention of the covenant between God and him,
occurs Genesis xv. 18: “The same day the Lord made a cove
nant with Abram, saying, Unto thy seed will I give this land.”
But this is much more explicitly related in chapter xvii. 1, &c.:
“The Lord appeared unto Abram, and said unto him, I am
the almighty God; walk before me, and be thou perfect. And
I will make my covenant between me and thee, and will
multiply thee exceedingly. And Abram fell on his face: And
God talked with him, saying, As for me, behold, my covenant
is with thee, and thou shalt be a father of many nations.
Neither shall thy name any more be called Abram, but thy
~mame shall be Abraham; for a father of many nations have I
made thee. And I will establish my covenant between me
240 PREDESTINATION CALMLY CONSIDERED.
and thee, and thy seed after thee, for an everlasting covenant,
to be a God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee. Every
man-child among you shall be circumcised;—it shall be a
token of the covenant betwixt me and you. The uncircumcised
man-child shall be cut off; he hath broken my covenant.”
So we see, this original covenant, though everlasting, was
conditional, and man’s failing in the condition cleared God.
63. We have St. Paul’s account of this covenant of God
with Abraham, in the fourth chapter of his Epistle to the
Romans, verse 3, &c.: “Abraham,” saith he, “believed God,
and it was counted to him for righteousness.” (This was a
little before God established his covenant with him, and is
related Genesis xv. 6.) “And he received the sign of circum
cision, a seal of the righteousness of the faith which he had
yet being uncircumcised, that he might be the father of all
them that believe, though they be not circumcised, that
righteousness might be imputed unto them also; and the
father of circumcision” (that is, of them that are circumcised)
“to them who are not of the circumcision only, but also
walk in the steps of that faith of our father Abraham, which
he had being yet uncircumcised.” Now, if these words do
not express a conditional covenant, certainly none can.
64. The nature and ground of this covenant of God with
Abraham is farther explained: “And the Lord said, Shall I
hide from Abraham that thing which I do, seeing all the
nations of the earth shall be blessed in him ? For I know
him, that he will command his children, and his household
after him: And they shall keep the way of the Lord, to do
justice and judgment; that the Lord may bring unto Abraham
that which he hath spoken of him.” (Gen. xviii. 17, &c.)
Does God say here, “I will do it, because I will?” Nothing
less. The reason is explicitly assigned: “All nations shall be
blessed in him; for he will command his children, and they
shall keep the way of the Lord.”
The reason is yet more (clearly it cannot, but more) fully
set down in the twenty-second chapter, verse 16, &c.: “By
myself have I sworn, saith the Lord, because thou hast done
this thing, and hast not withheld thy son, thine only son :
That in blessing I will bless thee; and in thy seed shall all the
nations of the earth be blessed;” that is, the Messiah shall
spring from thee, “because thou hast obeyed my voice.”
This is yet again declared: “And the Lord appeared unto
FREDESTINATION CALMLY CONSIDERED. 241
Isaac, and said,—Sojourn in this land, and I will be with
thee, and bless thee: For unto thee, and unto thy seed, I will
perform the oath which I sware unto Abraham thy father.
In thy seed shall all nations of the earth be blessed: Because
that Abraham obeyed my voice, and kept my charge, my com
mandments, my statutes, and my laws.” (Gen. xxvi. 2, &c.)
65. This covenant, made to Abraham and his seed, is
mentioned again: “And the Lord called unto Moses, saying,
Thus shalt thou say to the house of Jacob, and tell the chil
dren of Israel: Ye have seen what I did to the Egyptians,
and how I bare you on eagles’ wings, and brought you unto
myself. Now therefore, if ye will obey my voice indeed, and
keep my covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto
me above all people.” (Exod. xix. 3, &c.)
In the following chapter, God declares the terms of the
covenant they were to keep, in ten commandments. And
these themselves are sometimes termed “the covenant,” some
times “the book of the covenant.” So, after God had made
an end of speaking to the people, it is said, “And Moses
wrote all the words of the Lord, and rose up early in the
morning,—and he took the book of the covenant, and read in
the audience of the people; and they said, All that the Lord
hath said will we do. And Moses took the blood,” (of the
burnt-offering,) “and sprinkled it on the people, and said,
Behold the blood of the covenant, which the Lord hath made
with you concerning all these words.” (xxiv. 4, &c.)
After the people had broken this covenant by worshipping
the golden calf, God renews it, Exodus xxxiv., where we read,
“And the Lord said unto Moses, Write thou these words:
For after the tenor of these words I have made a covenant with
thee and with Israel—and he wrote upon the tables the words
of the covenant, the ten commandments.” (Verses 27, 28.)
66. According to the tenor of this covenant, made to
Abraham and his seed, God afterward declares, “If ye walk
in my statutes, and keep my commandments, and do them;
then I will establish my covenant with you, and I will be
your God, and ye shall be my people. But if ye will not
hearken unto me, so that ye will not do all my command
ments, but that ye break my covenant; I will set my face
against you, and I will avenge the quarrel of my covenant.
Yet if they shall confess their iniquity, and if their uncircum
cised hearts be humbled; then will I remember my covenant.
WOL. X. R.
242 PREDESTINATION CALM LY CONSIDERED.
with Jacob, and also my covenant with Isaac, and also my
covenant with Abraham will I remember.” (Lev. xxvi. 3, &c.)
Consequently the covenant with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
was conditional, as well as that with their posterity.
67. “But is not the faithfulness of God engaged to keep all
that now believe from falling away?” I cannot say that.
Whatever assurance God may give to particular souls, I find no
general promise in holy writ, “that none who once believes
shall finally fall.” Yet, to say the truth, this is so pleasing an
opinion, so agreeable to flesh and blood, so suitable to whatever
of nature remains in those who have tasted the grace of God,
that I see nothing but the mighty power of God which can
restrain any who hears it from closing with it. But still it wants
one thing to recommend it,-plain, cogent scripture proof.
Arguments from experience alone will never determine this
point. They can only prove thus much, on the one hand, that
our Lord is exceeding patient; that he is peculiarly unwilling
any believer should perish; that he bears long, very long, with
all their follies, waiting to be gracious, and to heal their back
sliding; and that he does actually bring back many lost sheep,
who, to man’s apprehensions, were irrecoverable: But all this
does not amount to a convincing proof, that no believer can or
does fall from grace. So that this argument, from experience,
will weigh little with those who believe the possibility of falling.
And it will weigh full as little with those who do not; for
if you produce ever so many examples of those who were once
strong in faith, and are now more abandoned than ever, they
will evade it by saying, “O, but they will be brought back;
they will not die in their sins.” And if they do die in their
sins, we come no nearer; we have not gained one point still:
For it is easy to say, “They were only hypocrites; they never
had true faith.” Therefore Scripture alone can determine
this question; and Scripture does so fully determine it, that
there needs only to set down a very few texts, with some
short reflections upon them.
68. That one who is a true believer, or, in other words,
one who is holy or righteous in the judgment of God himself,
may nevertheless finally fall from grace, appears, (1.) From
the word of God by Ezekiel: “When the righteous turneth
away from his righteousness, and committeth iniquity: In
his trespass that he hath trespassed, and in his sin that he
hath sinned, in them shall he die.” (xviii. 24.)
PREDESTINATION CALMLY CONSIDERED. 243
Do you object, “This chapter relates wholly and solely to the
Jewish Church and nation ?”* I answer, Prove this. Till
then, I shall believe that many parts of it concern all mankind.
If you say, (2.) “The righteousness spoken of in this chap
ter was merely an outward righteousness, without any inward
principle of grace or holiness:” I ask, How is this consistent
with the thirty-first verse: “Cast away from you all your trans
gressions whereby ye have transgressed; and make you a new
heart and a new spirit?” Is this a “merely outward righteous
ness, without any inward principle of grace or holiness?”
69. Will you add, “But admitting the person here spoken
of to be a truly righteous man, what is here said is only a
supposition?” That I flatly deny. Read over the chapter
again; and you will see the facts there laid down to be not
barely supposed, but expressly asserted.
That the death here mentioned is eternal death, appears
from the twenty-sixth verse: “When a righteous man turn
eth away from his righteousness, and committeth iniquity,
and dieth in them,”—here is temporal death; “for his iniquity
that he hath done he shall die.” Here is death eternal.
If you assert, “Both these expressions signify the same
thing, and not two different deaths,” you put a palpable force
upon the text, in order to make the Holy Ghost speak nonsense.
“‘Dying in his iniquity,’” you say, “is the same thing
as “dying for his iniquity.’” Then the text means thus:
“When he dieth in them, he shall die in them.” A very
deep discovery !
But you say, “It cannot be understood of eternal death;
because they might be delivered from it by repentance and
reformation.” And why might they not by such repentance
as is mentioned in the thirty-first verse be delivered from
eternal death?
“But the whole chapter,” you think, “has nothing to do
with the spiritual and eternal affairs of men.”
I believe every impartial man will think quite the contrary, if
he reads calmly either the beginning of it,-‘‘All souls are mine,
saith the Lord God; the soul that sinneth, it shall die;” where
I can by no means allow that by the death of the soul is meant
only a temporal affliction; or the conclusion,-‘‘Repent, and
turn yourselves from all your transgressions; so iniquity shall
* See a pamphlet, entitled, “The Doctrine of the Saints' Final Perseverance,
Asserted and Vindicated.”
R 2
244 PREDESTINATION CALMLY CoNSIDERED.
not be your ruin. Cast away from you all your transgressions,
whereby ye have transgressed, and make you a new heart,
and a new spirit: For why will ye die, O house of Israel?”
It remains then, one who is righteous in the judgment of
God himself, may finally fall from grace.
70. Secondly. That one who is endued with the faith
which produces a good conscience, may nevertheless finally
fall, appears from the words of St. Paul to Timothy: “War
a good warfare; holding faith and a good conscience; which
some having put away concerning faith have made ship
wreck.” (1 Tim. i. 18, 19.)
Observe, (1.) These men had once the faith that produces
“a good conscience;” which they once had, or they could
not have “put it away.”
Observe, (2.) They made shipwreck of the faith, which
necessarily implies the total and final loss of it.
You object: “Nay, the putting away a good conscience
does not suppose they had it, but rather that they had it not.”
This is really surprising. But how do you prove it?
“Why, by Acts xiii. 46, where St. Paul says to the Jews, ‘It
was necessary that the word of God should first have been
spoken to you: But seeing ye put it from you, lo, we turn to
the Gentiles. Here you see the Jews, who never had the
gospel, are said to put it away.”
How ! Are you sure they “never had what they are here
said to put away?” Not so: What they put away, it is
undeniable, they had, till they put it away; namely, “the
word of God spoken” by Paul and Barnabas. This instance,
therefore, makes full against you. It proves just the reverse
of what you cited it for.
But you object further: “Men may have a good con
science, in some sense, without true faith.”
I grant it, in a restrained, limited sense; but not a good
conscience, simply and absolutely speaking. But such is that
of which the Apostle here speaks, and which he exhorts
Timothy to “hold fast.” Unless you apprehend that the
holding it fast likewise “rather supposes he never had it.”
“But the faith here mentioned means only the doctrine of
faith.” I want better proof of this.
It remains, then, one who has the faith which produces a
good conscience may yet finally fall.
71. Thirdly. Those who are grafted into the good olive
PREDESTINATION CALM LY CONSIDERED. 245
tree, the spiritual, invisible Church, may nevertheless finally
fall.
For thus saith the Apostle: “Some of the branches are
broken off, and thou art grafted in among them, and with
them partakest of the root and fatness of the olive-tree. Be
not high-minded, but fear: If God spared not the natural
branches, take heed lest he spare not thee. Behold the good
ness and severity of God! On them which fell, severity; but
toward thee, goodness, if thou continue in his goodness:
Otherwise thou shalt be cut off.” (Rom. xi. 17, &c.)
We may observe here, (1.) The persons spoken to were
actually ingrafted into the olive-tree.
(2.) This olive-tree is not barely the outward, visible Church,
but the invisible, consisting of holy believers. So the text:
“If the first fruit be holy, the lump is holy; and if the root
be holy, so are the branches.” And “because of unbelief
they were broken off, and thou standest by faith.”
(3.) Those holy believers were still liable to be cut off from
the invisible Church, into which they were then grafted.
(4.) Here is not the least intimation of their being ever
grafted in again.
To this you object, (1) “This olive-tree is not the invisible
Church, but only the outward gospel Church state.” You
affirm this; and I prove the contrary; namely, that it is the
invisible Church; for it “consists of holy believers,” which
none but the invisible Church does.
You object, (2) “The Jews who were broken off were
never true believers in Christ.”
I am not speaking of the Jews, but of those Gentiles who
are mentioned in the twenty-second verse; whom St. Paul
exhorts to “continue in his goodness;” otherwise, saith he,
“thou shalt be cut off.” Now, I presume these were true
believers in Christ. Yet they were still liable to be cut off.
You assert, (3) “This is only a cutting off from the outward
Church state.” But how is this proved? So forced and unnatural
a construction requires some argument to support it.
You say, (4) “There is a strong intimation that they shall
be grafted in again.” No; not that those Gentiles who did
not continue in his goodness should be grafted in after they
were once cut off. I cannot find the least intimation of this.
“But all Israel shall be saved.” I believe they will; but this
does not imply the re-ingrafting of these Gentiles.
246 PREDESTINATION CALMLY CONSIDERED.
It remains, then, that those who are grafted into the
spiritual, invisible Church, may nevertheless finally fall.
72. Fourthly. Those who are branches of Christ, the true
vine, may yet finally fall from grace.
For thus saith, our blessed Lord himself: “I am the true
vine, and my Father is the husbandman. Every branch in me
that beareth not fruit, he taketh away. I am the vine, ye are
the branches. If a man abide not in me, he is cast forth as a
branch, and is withered; and men gather them, and cast them
into the fire, and they are burned.” (John xv. 1, &c.)
Here we may observe, (1.) The persons spoken of were in
Christ, branches of the true vine.
(2.) Some of these branches abide not in Christ, but “the
Father taketh them away.”
(3) The branches which “abide not” are “cast forth,”
cast out from Christ and his Church.
(4) They are not only “cast forth,” but “withered;”
consequently, never grafted in again.
(5.) They are not only “cast forth and withered,” but also
“cast into the fire.” And,
(6) “They are burned.” It is not possible for words more
strongly to declare that those who are branches of the true
vine may finally fall.
“But this,” you say, “furnishes an argument for, not
against, the persevering of the saints.”
Yes, just such an argument for final perseverance, as the
above cited words of St. Paul to Timothy.
But how do you make it out? “Why thus: There are
two sorts of branches in Christ the vine; the one fruitful, the
other unfruitful. The one are eternally chosen; and these
abide in him, and can never withdraw away.” Nay, this is
the very point to be proved. So that you now immediately
and directly beg the question.
“The other sort of branches are such as are in Christ only
by profession; who get into Churches, and so are reckoned in
Christ; and these in time wither away. These never had any
life, grace, or fruitfulness from him.”
Surely you do not offer this by way of argument! You are
again taking for granted the very point to be proved.
But you will prove that “those are branches in Christ, who
never had any life or grace from him, because the Churches
of Judea and Thessalonica are said to be in Christ, though
PREDESTINATION CALMLY CONSIDERED. 247
every individual member was not savingly in him.” I deny
the consequence; which can never be made good, unless you
can prove that those very Jews or Thessalonians who never
had any life or grace from him are nevertheless said by our
Lord to be “branches in him.”
It remains, that true believers, who are branches of the
true vine, may nevertheless finally fall.
73. Fifthly. Those who so effectually know Christ, as by
that knowledge to have escaped the pollutions of the world, may
yet fall back into those pollutions, and perish everlastingly.
For thus saith the Apostle Peter, “If, after they have
escaped the pollutions of the world, through the knowledge
of the Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ,” (the only possible
way of escaping them,) “they are entangled again therein
and overcome, the latter end is worse with them than the
beginning.” (2 Peter ii. 20.)
But you say, (1.) “Their knowledge was not an experi
mental knowledge.” And how do you prove this? “Because
had it been such, they could not have lost it.” You are
begging the question again.
You say, (2) “Escaping the pollutions of the world signifies
no more than an outward reformation.” How prove you that?
You aim at no proof at all. But he that will grant it, may.
You say, (3) “These persons never had any change wrought
upon them. They were no other than dogs and swine, not
only before and after, but even while they outwardly abstained
from gross enormities.”
I grant, that before and after that time, during which they
“escaped the pollutions of the world,” (or, as St. Peter words
it in his former Epistle, “the corruption that is in the world,”)
they might well be termed either “dogs” or “swine,” for
their gross enormities. But that they deserved such an appel
lation during that time, I cannot grant without some proof.
It remains, that those who, by the inward knowledge of
Christ, have escaped the pollutions of the world may yet fall
back into those pollutions, and perish everlastingly.
74. Sixthly. Those who see the light of the glory of God in
the face of Jesus Christ, and who have been made partakers of
the Holy Ghost, of the witness and the fruits of the Spirit,
may nevertheless so fall from God as to perish everlastingly.
For thus saith the writer to the Hebrews: “It is impossible
for those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the
248 PREDESTINATION CALMLY CONSIDERED.
heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, if
they fall away, to renew them again to repentance; seeing
they crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put
him to an open shame.” (vi. 4–6.)
Must not every unprejudiced person see, the expressions
here used are so strong and clear, that they cannot, without
gross and palpable wresting, be understood of any but true
believers?
“But the Apostle makes only a supposition, ‘If they shall
fall away.’”
The Apostle makes no supposition at all. There is no if in
the original. The words are, ABuvarov re; awa; poria'svlag—
x·x araparsgowla;; that is, in plain English, “It is impossible
to renew again unto repentance those who were once
enlightened and have fallen away.”
“No. The words in the original lie literally thus: ‘It is
impossible for those who were once enlightened, and they falling
away, to renew them again unto repentance;’ that is, should
they fall away, which is, in plain English, if they fall away.”
Excuse me for speaking plain English here. “Shall a
man lie for God?” Either you or I do; for I flatly aver,
(and let all that understand Greek judge between us,) that
the words in the original do not lie literally thus, “and they
falling away;” (if so, they must be xx wapatitlowlas, in the
present tense; not xx, arapatsaowlas, in the indefinite ;) but
that they are translated, “and have fallen away,” as literally
as the English tongue will bear.
Therefore here is no if in the case, no supposition at all, but
-a plain declaration of matter of fact.
75. “But why do you imagine these persons were true
believers?” Because all the expressions, in their easy, natural
sense, imply it.
They “were once enlightened;” an expression familiar with
the Apostle, and never by him applied to any but believers.
So “the God of our Lord Jesus Christ give unto you the Spirit
of wisdom and revelation: The eyes of your understanding
being enlightened, that ye may know what is the hope of his
calling; and what is the exceeding greatness of his power to
us-ward that believe.” (Eph. i. 17, &c.) So again: “God,
who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, hath shined
in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory
of God in the face of Jesus Christ.” (2 Cor. iv. 6)
PREDESTINATION CALMLY CONSIDERED. 249
“Nay, ‘they were enlightened’ means only, they were
baptized, or knew the doctrines of the gospel.”
I cannot believe this, till you bring me a few passages from
St. Paul’s writings, wherein that expression is evidently taken
in either of these senses.
Again: They “had tasted of the heavenly gift,” (empha
tically so called,) “and were made partakers of the Holy
Ghost.” So St. Peter likewise couples them together: “Be
baptized for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the
gift of the Holy Ghost;” (Acts ii. 38;) whereby the love
of God was shed abroad in their hearts, with all the other
fruits of the Spirit.
The expression, “They had tasted of the heavenly gift,” is
taken from the Psalmist, “Taste and see that the Lord is
good.” As if he had said, Beye as assured of his love, as of
any thing you see with your eyes. And let the assurance
thereof be sweet to your soul, as honey is to your tongue.
“But this means only, they had some notions of remission
of sins and heaven, and some desires after them; and they
had received the extraordinary gifts of the Holy Ghost.”
This you affirm; but without any colour of proof.
It remains, that those who see the light of the glory of
God in the face of Jesus Christ, and who have been made
partakers of the Holy Ghost, of the witness and the fruits of
the Spirit, may nevertheless so fall from God as to perish
everlastingly.
76. Seventhly. Those who live by faith may yet fall from
God, and perish everlastingly.
For thus saith the Apostle: “The just shall live by faith:
But if any man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in
him.” (Heb. x. 38.) “The just” (the justified person, of
whom only this can be said) “shall live by faith;” even now
shall live the life which is hid with Christ in God; and if he
endure unto the end, shall live with God for ever. “But if
any man draw back,” saith the Lord, “my soul shall have no
pleasure in him;” that is, I will utterly cast him off: And
accordingly the drawing back here spoken of, is termed in the
verse immediately following, “drawing back to perdition.”
“But the person supposed to draw back, is not the same
with him that is said to live by faith.”
I answer, (1.) Who is it then? Can any man draw back
from faith who never came to it? But, (2) Had the text been
250 PREDESTINATION CALM LY CONSIDERED.
fairly translated, there had been no pretence for this objec
tion. For the original runs thus: O Bixalog ex arissa's masla.
xon sav wrossixnlai. If o Bixxios, “the just man that lives by
faith,” (so the expression necessarily implies, there being no
other nominative to the verb,) “draws back, my soul shall
have no pleasure in him.”
“But your translation too is inaccurate.” Be pleased to
show me wherein.
“I grant he may draw back; and yet not draw back to
perdition.” But then it is not the drawing back which is
here spoken of.
“However, here is only a supposition, which proves no
fact.” I observe, you take that as a general rule, Suppo
sitions prove no facts. But this is not true. They do not
always; but many times they do. And whether they do or
no in a particular text, must be judged from the nature of the
supposition, and from the preceding and following words.
“But the inserting any man into the text is agreeable to
the grammatical construction of the words.” This I totally
deny. There is no need of any such insertion. The preceding
nominative suffices.
“But one that lives by faith cannot draw back. For ‘whom
he justified, them he also glorified.” This proves no more than,
that all who are glorified are pardoned and sanctified first.
“Nay, but St. Paul says, “Ye are dead; and your life is hid
with Christ in God. When Christ, who is our life, shall
appear, then shall ye also appear with him in glory.’” Most
sure, if you endure to the end. “Whosoever believeth in
him” to the end “shall never die.”
77. “But, to come more home to the point: I say, this text
is so far from militating against perseverance, that it greatly
establishes it.”
You are very unhappy in your choice of texts to establish
this doctrine. Two of these establish it, just as this does, as
we have seen already. Now, pray let us hear how you prove
perseverance from this text.
“Very easily. Here are two sorts of persons mentioned; he
that lives by faith, and he that draws back to perdition.”
Nay, this is the very question. I do not allow that two
persons are mentioned in the text. I have shown it is one
and the same person, who once lived by faith, and afterwards
draws back.
PREDESTINATION CALMLY CONSIDERED. 251
Yet thus much I allow : Two sorts of believers are in the
next verse mentioned; some that draw back, and some that
persevere. And I allow, the Apostle adds, “We are not of
them who draw back unto perdition.” But what will you
infer from thence? This is so far from contradicting what
has been observed before, that it manifestly confirms it. It
is a farther proof, that there are those who draw back unto
perdition, although these were not of that number.
“I must still aver, that the text is rightly translated; which
I prove thus:—
“The original text runs thus: ‘Behold, his soul who is
lifted up is not upright in him: But the just shall live by his
faith.” (Hab. ii. 4.)
“This the Seventy render, Exy vros sixntal, ex su?oxsi n Jux"
as sw avra o 8s 3.xxios ex arissa; we &nts rai, “If a man draw
back, my soul hath no pleasure in him. But the just shall
live by my faith;’ that is, faith in me.
“Now, here the man, in the former clause, who ‘draws
back, is distinguished from him, in the following clause, who
lives by faith.
“But the Apostle quotes the text from this translation.”
True; but he does not “distinguish the man in the former
clause who ‘draws back, from him, in the latter, who ‘lives
by faith.” So far from it, that he quite inverts the order of
the sentence, placing the latter clause of it first. And by this
means it comes to pass, that although, in translating this text
from the Septuagint, we must insert “a man,” (because there
is no nominative preceding,) yet in translating it from the
Apostle, there is no need or pretence for inserting it, seeing
o Bixalog stands just before.
Therefore, such an insertion is a palpable violence to the
text; which, consequently, is not rightly translated.
It remains, that those who live by faith may yet fall from
God, and perish everlastingly.
78. Eighthly. Those who are sanctified by the blood of the
covenant may so fall as to perish everlastingly.
For thus again saith the Apostle: “If we sin wilfully, after
we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remaineth
no more sacrifice for sin; but a certain fearful looking for of
judgment and fiery indignation, which shall devour the adver
saries. He that despised Moses’ law died without mercy
under two or three witnesses. Of how much sorer punish
252 PREDESTINATION CALM LY CONSIDERED.
ment shall he be thought worthy, who hath trodden under
foot the Son of God, and hath counted the blood of the cove
nant, wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing?”
It is undeniably plain, (1.) That the person mentioned here
was once sanctified by the blood of the covenant. (2.) That
he afterward, by known, wilful sin, trod under foot the Son
of God. And, (3.) That he hereby incurred a sorer punish
ment than death; namely, death everlasting.
“Nay, the immediate antecedent to the relative ‘he, is ‘the
Son of God.” Therefore it was He, not the apostate, who was
sanctified (set apart for his priestly office) by the blood of the
covenant.”
Either you forgot to look at the original, or your memory
fails. “The Son of God” is not the immediate antecedent
to the relative “he.” The words run thus: “Of how much
sorer punishment shall he be thought worthy, who hath
trodden under foot the Son of God, xxi to aqua rmg 3,267x7;
xoivov myngap.svos, sy % myia Tón 7” You see Wynaap.svos, not vios,
is the immediate antecedent to the relative “he.” Conse
quently, it is the apostate, not the Son of God, who is here
said to be sanctified.
“If he was sanctified, yet this cannot be understood of
inward sanctification. Therefore it must mean, either that
he said he was sanctified, or that he made an outward
profession of religion.”
Why cannot the word be understood in its proper, natural
sense, of inward sanctification?
“Because that is by the Spirit of God.” From this very
consideration it appears, that this must be understood of
inward sanctification; for the words immediately following
are, “and hath done despite to the Spirit of grace,” even that
grace whereby he was once sanctified.
It remains, that those who are sanctified by the blood of
the covenant may yet perish everlastingly.
79. If you imagine these texts are not sufficient to prove
that a true believer may finally fall, I will offer a few more to
your consideration, which I would beg you to weigh farther
at your leisure:
“Ye” (Christians) “are the salt of the earth, But if the salt
have lost its savour, wherewith shall it be salted? It is thence
forth good for nothing, but to be cast out, and trodden under
foot of men.” (Matt. v. 13.) “When the unclean spirit goeth
PREDESTINATION CALMLY CONSIDERED. 253
out of a man,” (as he does out of every true believer,) “he
walketh through dry places, seeking rest, and findeth none.
Then he saith, I will return : And he taketh with him seven
other spirits; and they enter in, and dwell there. And the
last state of that man is worse than the first.” (xii. 43–45.)
“And then shall many be offended; and the love” (towards
God and man) “of many shall wax cold. But he that shall
endure to the end, the same shall be saved.” (xxiv. 10, &c.)
“Who then is a faithful and wise servant, whom his lord hath
made ruler over his household? But if that evil servant”
(wise and faithful as he was once) “shall begin to smite his
fellow-servants; the Lord shall cut him asunder, and appoint
him his portion with the hypocrites,” (verse 45, &c.,) apostates,
being no better than they.
“Take heed to yourselves,” ye that believe, “lest at any
time your heart be overcharged with the cares of this life,
and so that day come upon you unawares:” (Luke xxi. 34:)
Plainly implying, that otherwise they would not be “accounted
worthy to stand before the Son of man.”
“If ye continue in my word, then are ye my disciples
indeed; and ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall
make you free.” (John viii. 31, 32.)
“I keep my body under; lest by any means, when I have
preached to others, I myself should be a cast-away.” (1 Cor. ix.
27.) “Our fathers did all eat the same spiritual meat, and
did all drink the same spiritual drink: For they drank of that
spiritual rock that followed them: And that rock was Christ.
But with many of them God was not well pleased: For they
were overthrown in the wilderness. Now, these things were
for our examples: Wherefore let him that thinketh he stand
eth take heed lest he fall.” (x. 3, &c.)
“We therefore, as workers together with him, beseech you
that ye receive not the grace of God in vain.” (2 Cor. vi. 1.)
But this were impossible, if none that ever had it could
perish.
“Ye are fallen from grace.” (Gal. v. 4) “We shall reap,
if we faint not.” (vi. 9.) Therefore we shall not reap, if
we do.
“We are made partakers of Christ, if we hold the beginning
of our confidence steadfast unto the end.” (Heb. iii. 14.)
“Beware lest ye also, being led away with the error of the
wicked, fall from your own steadfastness.” (2 Peter iii. 17.)
254 PREDESTINATION CALMLY CONSIDERED.
“Look to yourselves, that we lose not the things which we
have wrought.” (2 John 8.)
“Hold that fast which thou hast, that no man take thy
crown.” (Rev. iii. 11.) And, to conclude :
“So likewise shall my heavenly Father do also unto you,
if ye from your hearts forgive not every one his brother their
trespasses.” (Matt. xviii. 35.) So How? He will retract
the pardon he had given, and deliver you to the tormentors.
80. “Why, then you make salvation conditional.” I make
it neither conditional nor unconditional. But I declare just
what I find in the Bible, neither more nor less; namely, that
it is bought for every child of man, and actually given to
every one that believeth. If you call this conditional salva
tion, God made it so from the beginning of the world; and
he hath declared it so to be, at sundry times and in divers
manners; of old by Moses and the Prophets, and in later
times by Christ and his Apostles.-
“Then I never can be saved; for I can perform no condi
tions; for I can do nothing.” No, nor I, nor any man under
heaven,—without the grace of God. “But I can do all things
through Christ strengthening me.” So can you; so can every
believer. And he has strengthened, and will strengthen, you
more and more, if you do not wilfully resist till you quench
his Spirit.
81. “Nay, but God must work irresistibly in me, or I shall
never be saved.” Hold ! Consider that word. You are again
advancing a doctrine which has not one plain, clear text to
support it. I allow, God may possibly, at some times, work
irresistibly in some souls. I believe he does. But can you
infer from hence, that he always works thus in all that are
saved? Alas! my brother, what kind of conclusion is this?
And by what scripture will you prove it? Where, I pray, is
it written, that none are saved but by irresistible grace? By
almighty grace, I grant; by that power alone, to which all
things are possible. But show me any one plain scripture
for this,—that “all saving grace is irresistible.”
82. But this doctrine is not only unsupported by Scripture,
it is flatly contrary thereto. How will you reconcile it (to
instance in a very few) with the following texts?—
“He sent to call them, and they would not come.” (Matt.
xxii. 3, &c.) “He could do no mighty works there, because
of their unbelief.” (Mark vi. 5, 6.) “There were Pharisees,
PREDESTINATION CALM LY CONSIDERED. 255
and the power of the Lord was present to heal them.”
(Luke v. 17.) Nevertheless, they were not healed in fact, as
the words immediately following show.
“The Pharisees and Lawyers made void the counsel of
God against themselves.” (Luke vii. 30.) “O Jerusalem,
Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thy children,
and ye would not !” (xiii. 34.) “It is the Spirit that
quickeneth; the words that I speak unto you, they are Spirit.
But there are some of you that believe not.” (John vi. 63, &c.)
Therefore, that Spirit did not work irresistibly. “Ye do
always resist the Holy Ghost: As your fathers did, so do ye.”
(Acts vii. 51.) “Ye put it from you, and judge yourselves
unworthy of eternal life.” (xiii. 46.) “While it is called
to-day, harden not your heart. Take heed lest there be in
any of you an evil heart of unbelief, departing from the living
God.” (Heb. iii. 8, 12.) “See that ye refuse not him that
speaketh.” (xii. 25.)
83. J do but just give you a specimen of the innumerable
scriptures which might be produced on this head. And why
will you adhere to an opinion not only unsupported by, but
utterly contrary both to, reason and Scripture? Be pleased to
observe here also, that you are not to consider the doctrine of
irresistible grace by itself, any more than that of unconditional
election, or final perseverance; but as it stands in connexion
with unconditional reprobation: That millstone which hangs
about the neck of your whole hypothesis.
Will you say, “I adhere to it, because of its usefulness?”
Wherein does that usefulness lie? “It exalts God and debases
man.” In what sense does it exalt God? God in himself is
exalted above all praise. Your meaning, therefore, I suppose,
is this: It displays to others how highly he is exalted in justice,
mercy, and truth. But the direct contrary of this has been
shown at large; it has been shown, by various considerations,
that God is not exalted, but rather dishonoured, and that in the
highest degree, by supposing him to despise the work of his
own hands, the far greater part of the souls which he hath
made. And as to the debasing man; if you mean, this opinion
truly humbles the men that hold it, I fear it does not: I have
not perceived, (and I have had large occasion to make the
trial,) that all, or even the generality of them that hold it, are
more humble than other men. Neither, I think, will you say,
that none are humble who hold it not: So that it is neither a
256 PREDESTINATION CALMLY CONSIDERED,
necessary nor a certain means of humility. And if it be so some
times, this only proves that God can bring good out of evil.
84. The truth is, neither this opinion nor that, but the love
of God, humbles man, and that only. Let but this be shed
abroad in his heart, and he abhors himself in dust and ashes.
As soon as this enters into his soul, lowly shame covers his face.
That thought, “What is God? What hath he done for me?”
is immediately followed by, “What am I?” And he knoweth
not what to do, or where to hide, or how to abase himself
enough, before the great God of love, of whom he now knoweth,
that as his majesty is, so is his mercy. Let him who has felt
this (whatever be his opinion) say, whether he could then take
glory to himself; whether he could ascribe to himself any part
of his salvation, or the glory of any good word or thought.
Lean, then, who will, on that broken reed for humility; but
let the love of God humble my soul!
85. “Why, this is the very thing which recommends it.
This doctrine makes men love God.” I answer as before.
Accidentally it may; because God can draw good out of evil.
But you will not say, all who hold it love God; so it is no
certain means to that end. Nor will you say, that none love
him who hold it not : Neither, therefore, is it a necessary
means. But, indeed, when you talk at all of its “making
men love God,” you know not what you do. You lead men
into more danger than you are aware of You almost unavoid
ably lead them into resting on that opinion; you cut them
off from a true dependence on the fountain of living waters,
and strengthen them in hewing to themselves broken cisterns,
which can hold no water.
86. This is my grand objection to the doctrine of reproba
tion, or (which is the same) unconditional election. That it
is an error, I know ; because, if this were true, the whole
Scripture must be false. But it is not only for this—because
it is an error—that I so earnestly oppose it, but because it is
an error of so pernicious consequence to the souls of men;
because it directly and naturally tends to hinder the inward
work of God in every stage of it.
87. For instance: Is a man careless and unconcerned, utterly
dead in trespasses and sins?—Exhort him then (suppose he is
of your own opinion) to take some care of his immortal soul.
“I take care!” says he: “What signifies my care? Why, what
must be, must be. If I am elect, I must be saved; and if I am
PREDESTINATION CALMLY CONSIDERED. 257
not, I must be damned.” And the reasoning is as just and
strong, as it is obvious and natural. It avails not to say,
“Men may abuse any doctrine.” So they may. But this is
not abusing yours. It is the plain, natural use of it. The
premises cannot be denied, (on your scheme,) and the conse
quence is equally clear and undeniable. Is he a little serious
and thoughtful now and then, though generally cold and
lukewarm?—Press him then to stir up the gift that is in
him; to work out his own salvation with fear and trembling.
“Alas,” says he, “what can I do ! You know, man can do
nothing.” If you reply: “But you do not desire salvation;
you are not willing to be saved:” “It may be so,” says he,
“but God shall make me willing in the day of his power.”
So, waiting for irresistible grace, he falls faster asleep than
ever. See him again, when he throughly awakes out of
sleep; when, in spite of his principles, fearfulness and trem
bling are come upon him, and an horrible dread hath
overwhelmed him. How then will you comfort him that is
well-nigh swallowed up of over-much sorrow? If at all, by
applying the promises of God. But against these he is
fenced on every side. “These indeed,” says he, “are great
and precious promises. But they belong to the elect only.
Therefore they are nothing to me. I am not of that number.
And I never can be; for his decree is unchangeable.” Has
he already tasted of the good word, and the powers of the
world to come? Being justified by faith, hath he peace with
God? Then sin hath no dominion over him. But by and
by, considering he may fall foully indeed, but cannot fall
finally, he is not so jealous over himself as he was at first; he
grows a little and a little slacker, till ere long he falls again
into the sin from which he was clean escaped. As soon as
you perceive he is entangled again and overcome, you apply
the scriptures relating to that state. You conjure him not
to harden his heart any more, lest his last state be worse
than the first. “How can that be?” says he: “Once in
grace, always in grace; and I am sure I was in grace once.
You shall never tear away my shield.” So he sins on, and
sleeps on, till he awakes in hell.
88. The observing these melancholy examples day by day,
this dreadful havoc which the devil makes of souls, especially
of those who had begun to run well, by means of this anti
scriptural doctrine, constrains me to oppose it from the same
VOL. X. S
258 PREDESTINATION CALMLY CONSIDERED.
principle whereon I labour to save souls from destruction.
Nor is it sufficient to ask, Are there not also many who wrest
the opposite doctrine to their own destruction? If there are,
that is nothing to the point in question; for that is not the
case here. Here is no wresting at all: The doctrine of
absolute predestination naturally leads to the chambers of
death.
Let an instance in each kind be proposed, and the difference
is so broad, he that runneth may read it. I say, “Christ
died for all. He tasted death for every man, and he willeth
all men to be saved.” “O,” says an hearer, “then I can be
saved when I will; so I may safely sin a little longer.” No.;
this is no consequence from what I said; the words are
wrested to infer what does not follow. You say, “Christ died
only for the elect; and all these must and shall be saved.”
“O,” says an hearer, “then if I am one of the elect, I must
and shall be saved. Therefore I may safely sin a little longer;
for my salvation cannot fail.” Now, this is a fair consequence
from what you said: The words are not wrested at all. No
more is inferred than what plainly and undeniably follows
from the premises. And the very same observation may be
made on every article of that doctrine. Every branch of it,
as well as this, (however the wisdom of God may sometimes
draw good out of it,) has a natural, genuine tendency, without
any wresting, either to prevent or obstruct holiness.
89. Brethren, would ye lie for the cause of God? I am
persuaded ye would not. Think then that as ye are, so am
I: I speak the truth, before God my Judge; not of those
who were trained up therein, but of those who were lately
brought over to your opinion. Many of these have I known;
but I have not known one in ten of all that number, in
whom it did not speedily work some of the above-named
effects, according to the state of soul they were then in.
And one only have I known among them all, after the closest
and most impartial observation, who did not evidently show,
within one year, that his heart was changed, not for the
better, but for the worse.
90. I know indeed, ye cannot easily believe this. But
whether ye believe it or no, you believe, as well as I, that
without holiness no man shall see the Lord. May we not
then, at least, join in this,—in declaring the nature of inward
holiness, and testifying to all the necessity of it? May we
A DIALOGUE. 259
not all thus far join in tearing away the broken reeds wherein
so many rest, without either inward or outward holiness, and
which they idly trust will supply its place? As far as is
possible, let us join in destroying the works of the devil, and
in setting up the kingdom of God upon earth, in promoting
righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost.
Of whatever opinion or denomination we are, we must
serve either God or the devil. If we serve God, our agree
ment is far greater than our difference. Therefore, as far as
may be, setting aside that difference, let us unite in destroy
ing the works of the devil, in bringing all we can from the
power of darkness into the kingdom of God's dear Son.
And let us assist each other to value more and more the
glorious grace whereby we stand, and daily to grow in that
grace and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.
A DIALOG UE
BETWEEN
A PREDESTIN ARIAN AND HIS FRIEN ID.
Out of thine own mouth !
TO ALL PREDESTINARIANS.
1. I AM informed, some of you have said, that the following
quotations are false; that these words were not spoken by
these authors; others, that they were not spoken in this
sense; and others, that neither you yourself, nor any true
Predestinarian, ever did, or ever would, speak so.
2. My friends, the authors here quoted are well known, in
whom you may read the words with your own eyes. And
you who have read them know in your own conscience, they
were spoken in this sense, and no other; nay, that this sense
of them is professedly defended throughout the whole
treatises whence they are taken.
S 2
260 DIALOGUE BETWEEN
3. But, be this as it may, do you indeed say, “No true
Predestinarian ever did or would speak so?” Why, every
true Predestinarian must speak so, and so must you yourself
too, if you dare speak out, unless they and you renounce
your fundamental principle.
4. Your fundamental principle is this: “God from eternity
ordained whatsoever should come to pass.” But from this
single position undeniably follows every assertion hereafter
mentioned. It remains therefore only that you choose which
you please (for one you must choose) of these three things:
Either, (1.) To equivocate, evade the question, and prevaricate
without end; or, (2.) To swallow all these assertions together,
and honestly to avow them; or, (3.) To renounce them all
together, and believe in Christ, the Saviour of all.
FRIEND.—SIR, I have heard that you make God the
author of all sin, and the destroyer of the greater part of
mankind without mercy.
PREDESTINARIAN.—I deny it; I only say, “God did from
all eternity unchangeably ordain whatsoever comes to pass.”
(Assembly’s Catechism, chap. 3.)
Friend.—Do you make no exception ?
Pred.—No, surely; for “nothing is more absurd than to
think anything at all is done but by the ordination of God.”
(Calvin’s Institutes, book I., chap. 16, sect. 3.)
Friend.—Do you extend this to the actions of men?
Pred.—Without doubt: “Every action and motion of
every creature is so governed by the hidden counsel of God,
that nothing can come to pass, but what was ordained by
him.” (Ibid., sect. 3.)
Friend.—But what then becomes of the wills of men?
Pred.—“The wills of men are so governed by the will of
God, that they are carried on straight to the mark which he
has fore-ordained.” (Ibid., sect. 8.)
Friend.—I suppose you mean the permissive will of God?
Pred.—No : I mean, “all things come to pass by the
efficacious and irresistible will of God.” (Twissi Vindicia
Gratiae Potestatis & Providentia Dei. Editio Jensoniana,
par. 3, p. 19.)
Friend.—Why, then, all men must do just what they do?
Pred.-True: “It is impossible that anything should ever
:
:
c
:
.
A PREDESTINARIAN AND HIS FRIEND. 261
be done, but that to which God impels the will of man.”
(Ibid., p. 19.)
Friend.—But does not this imply the necessity of all
events?
Pred.—“I will not scruple to own that the will of God lays
a necessity on all things, and that every thing he wills neces
sarily comes to pass.” (Calvin’s Inst., b. 3, c. 24, sec. 8.)
Friend.—Does sin then necessarily come to pass?
Pred.—Undoubtedly : For “the almighty power of God
extends itself to the first fall, and all other sins of angels and
men.” (Assembly’s Catechism, c. 5.)
Friend.—I grant, God foresaw the first man would fall.
Pred.—Nay, “God not only foresaw that Adam would fall,
but also ordained that he should.” (Calvin’s Inst., b. 3, c. 23,
sec. 7.)
Friend.—I know God permitted Adam’s fall.
Pred.—I tell you, “he fell not only by the permission, but
also by the appointment, of God.” (Calvini Responsio ad
Calumnias Nebulonis cujusdam ad Articulum primum.) “He
sinned because God so ordained, because the Lord saw good.”
(Calvin's Inst., b. 3, c. 24, sec. 8.)
Friend.—But do not those who differ from you raise many
objections against you as to this point?
Pred.—Yes: “Those poisonous dogs vomit out many things
against God.” (Ibid., b. 3, c. 23, sec. 2.) “They deny that
the Scripture says God decreed Adam’s fall. They say he
might have chose either to fall or not; and that God fore
ordained only to treat him according to his desert: As if God
had created the noblest of all his creatures, without fore
ordaining what should become of him !” (Ibid., sec. 7.)
Friend.—Did God then make Adam on purpose that he
might fall?
Pred.—Undoubtedly. “God made Adam and Eve to this
very purpose, that they might be tempted and led into sin.
And by force of his decree, it could not otherwise be but they
must sin.” (Piscatoris Disput. Praedest, Praef, p. 6)
Friend.—But do not you ground God's decree on God’s
foreknowledge rather than his will?
Pred.—No : “God foresees nothing but what he has
decreed, and his decree precedes his knowledge.” (Piscat.
Disput. Praedest.)
Friend.—Well, this may truly be termed a horrible decree.
262 DIALOGUE BETWEEN
Pred.—“I confess it is a horrible decree; yet no one can
deny but God foreknew Adam's fall, and therefore foreknew
it, because he had ordained it so by his own decree.” (Calv.
Inst., b. 3, c. 23, sec. 7.)
Friend.—Do you believe, then, that God has by his own
positive decree, not only elected some men to life, but also
reprobated all the rest?
Pred.—Most surely, if I believe one, I believe the other.
“Many indeed (thinking to excuse God) own election, and
yet deny reprobation; but this is quite silly and childish.
For without reprobation, election itself cannot stand; whom
God passes by, those he reprobates.” (Calv. Inst., b. 3, c. 23,
sec. 1.)
Friend.—Pray explain what you mean by election and
reprobation.
Pred.—With all my heart. “All men are not created for
the same end; but some are fore-ordained to eternal life;
others to eternal damnation. So according as every man was
created for the one end or the other, we say he was elected or
predestinated to life, or reprobated, that is, predestinated to
destruction.” (Ibid., c. 21, sec. 1.)
Friend.—Pray repeat your meaning.
Pred.—“God hath once for all appointed, by an eternal
and unchangeable decree, to whom he would give salvation,
and whom he would devote to destruction.” (Ibid., sec. 7.)
Friend.—Did God make any man on purpose that he
might be damned?
Pred.—Did not I tell you before? “God’s first constitu
tion was, that some should be destined to eternal ruin; and
to this end their sins were ordained, and denial of grace in
order to their sins.” (Zanchius de Natura Dei, p. 553, 554.)
Friend.—But is not God’s predestinating men to life or
death grounded on his foreknowledge?
Pred.—“So the vulgar think; that God, as he foresees
every man will deserve, elects them to life, or devotes them to
death and damnation.” (Calv. Inst., b. 3, c. 22, sec. 1.)
Friend.—And do not you think that reprobation, at least,
is grounded on God’s foreknowing men’s sins?
Pred.—No indeed: “God of his own good pleasure ordains
that many should be born, who are from the womb devoted
to inevitable damnation. If any man pretend that God’s
foreknowledge lays them under no necessity of being damned,
A PREDESTINARIAN AND HIS FRIEND. 263
but rather that he decreed their dammation because he fore
knew their wickedness, I grant that God’s foreknowledge
, alone lays no necessity on the creature; but eternal life and
death depend on the will rather than the foreknowledge of
God. If God only foreknew all things that relate to all men,
and did not decree and ordain them also, then it might be
inquired whether or no his foreknowledge necessitates the
thing foreknown. But seeing he therefore foreknows all
things that will come to pass, because he has decreed they
shall come to pass, it is vain to contend about foreknowledge,
since it is plain all things come to pass by God’s positive
decree.” (Ibid., c. 23, s. 6.)
Friend.—But if God has positively decreed to damn the
greater part of mankind, why does he call upon them to
repent and be saved?
Pred.—“As God has his effectual call, whereby he gives the
elect the salvation to which he ordained them, so he has his
judgments towards the reprobates, whereby he executes his
decree concerning them. As many, therefore, as he created to
live miserably, and then perish everlastingly; these, that they
may be brought to the end for which they were created, he
sometimes deprives of the possibility of hearing the word, and
at other times, by the preaching thereof, blinds and stupifies
them the more.” (Ibid., c. 24, s. 12.)
Friend.—How is this? I say, if God has created them for
never-ending death, why does he call to them to turn and live?
Pred.—“He calls to them, that they may be more deaf; he
kindles a light, that they may be the more blind; he brings
his doctrine to them, that they may be more ignorant; and
applies the remedy to them, that they may not be healed.”
(Ibid., b. 3, c. 24, s. 13.)
Friend.—Enough, enough. Yet you do not make God the
author of sin!
Pred.—No certainly: “God cannot be termed the author
of sin, though he is the cause of those actions which are sins.”
(Petri Martyris Vermillii Com. in Roman., p. 413)
Friend.—How is he the cause of them then ?
Pred.—Two ways: First, by his eternal, unchangeable
decree; Secondly, by his present irresistible power.
Friend.—Did God then fore-ordain the sins of any man?
Pred.—“Both the reprobates and the elect were fore
ordained to sin, as sin, that the glory of God might be
264 DIALOGUE BETWEEN
leclared thereby.” (Zanchius de Nat. Dei, p. 555.) “The
reprobates,” more especially, “who were predestinated to
damnation, and the causes of damnation, and created to that
end, that they may live wickedly, and be vessels full of the
dregs of sin.” (Piscator contra Tauffium, p. 47.)
Friend.—But surely the sins of the elect were not fore
ordained?
Pred.—Yes, but they were: “For we neither can do more
good than we do, nor less evil than we do; because God from
eternity has precisely decreed that both the good and the evil
should be so done.” (Piscatoris Responsio ad Amicam Dupli
cationem Conradi Vorstii, p. 176.)
Friend.—I understand you, as to God’s decreeing sin.
But how is his irresistible power now concerned in the sins
of men?
Pred.—“God is the author of that action which is sinful
by his irresistible will.” (Dr. Twisse, par. 3, p. 21.)
Friend.—How do you mean?
Pred.-- “God procures adultery, cursings, lyings.” (Piscat.
Responsio ad Apologiam Bertii.) “He supplies wicked men
with opportunities of sinning, and inclines their hearts thereto.
He blinds, deceives, and seduces them. He, by his working
on their hearts, bends and stirs them up to do evil.” (Pet.
Martyr. Ver. Comment. in Rom., pp. 36, 413.) And thus
“thieves, murderers, and other malefactors are God’s instru
ments, which he uses to execute what he hath decreed in
himself.” (Calv. Inst., b. 1, c. 17, s. 5.)
Friend.—Do you not then charge God himself with sin?
Pred.—No : “God necessitates them only to the act of sin,
not to the deformity of sin.” (Twissi Vindicia, par. 3, p. 22.)
Besides, “when God makes angels or men sin, he does not sin
himself, because he does not break any law. For God is under
no law, and therefore cannot sin.” (Zuinglius in Serm. de
Provid., c. 5, 6.)
Friend.—But how does God make angels or men to sin?
Pred.—“The devil and wicked men are so held in on
every side with the hand of God, that they cannot conceive,
or contrive, or execute any mischief, any farther than God
himself doth not permit only, but command. Nor are they
only held in fetters, but compelled also, as with a bridle, to
perform obedience to those commands.” (Calv. Inst., b. 1,
c. 17, s. 11.)
A PREDESTINARIAN AND HIS FR1END. 265
Friend.—This is true Turkish doctrine, and ought so to be
exploded as that used to be in these words:
“I do anathematize the blasphemy of Mahomet, which
saith that God deceiveth whom he will, and whom he will he
leadeth to that which is good. Himself doeth what he
willeth, and is himself the cause of all good and all evil.
Fate and destiny govern all things.” (Nicetus Saracenita.)
Pred.—Nay, our doctrine is more ancient than Mahomet:
It was maintained by St. Augustine.
Friend.—Augustine speaks sometimes for it, and sometimes
against it. But all antiquity for the four first centuries is
against you, as is the whole Eastern Church to this day; and
the Church of England, both in her Catechism, Articles, and
Homilies. And so are divers of our most holy Martyrs,
Bishop Hooper and Bishop Latimer in particular.
Pred.—But does not antiquity say, Judas was predestinated
to damnation?
Friend.—Quite the contrary. St. Chrysostom’s express
words are, “Judas, my beloved, was at first a child of the
kingdom, and heard it said to him with the disciples, “Ye
shall sit on twelve thrones; but afterwards he became a
child of hell.”
Pred.—However, you will own that Esau was predestinated
to destruction.
Friend.—Indeed I will not. Some of your own writers
believe he was finally saved, which was the general opinion of
the ancient Fathers. And that scripture, “Jacob have I
loved, and Esau have I hated,” plainly relates not to their
persons but their posterities.*
But, supposing Esau or Judas to be damned, what is he
damned for ?-
Pred.—Without question, for unbelief. For as we are
saved by faith alone, so unbelief is the only damning sin.
Friend.—By what faith are you saved?
Pred.—By faith in Christ, who gave himself for me.
Friend.—But did he give himself for Esau and Judas? If
not, you say they are damned for not believing a lie.
This consideration it was which forced Archbishop Usher
to cry out, “What would not a man fly unto, rather than
yield, that Christ did not die for the reprobates; and that
none but the elect had any kind cf title to him; and yet
many thousands should be bound in conscience to believe that
266 DIALOGUE BETWEEN
he died for them, and tied to accept him for their Redeemer
and Saviour? Whereby they should have believed that which
in itself is most untrue, and laid hold of that in which they
had no kind of interest.”
Pred.—But what then do you mean by the words, election
and reprobation?
Friend.—I mean this: First, God did decree from the
beginning to elect or choose, in Christ, all that should believe
to salvation. And this decree proceeds from his own goodness,
and is not built upon any goodness in the creature. Secondly:
God did from the beginning decree to reprobate all who
should obstinately and finally continue in unbelief.
Pred.—What then do you think of absolute, unconditional
election and reprobation?
Friend.—I think it cannot be found in holy writ, and that
it is a plant which bears dismal fruit. An instance of which
we have in Calvin himself; who confesses that he procured
the burning to death of Michael Servetus, purely for differing
from him in opinion in matters of religion.
A DIAL O GUE
BETWEEN
AN ANTINOMIAN AND HIS FRIEND.
ANTINoM1AN.—WELL met, my friend. I am glad to
see you. But I am sorry to hear you have changed your
religion.
FRIEND.—Changed my religion I I do not know what you
Inean.
Ant.—Why, you once believed, we are saved by faith.
Friend.—Undoubtedly; and so I do still.
Ant.—Do you believe, then, that the “whole work of man’s
salvation was accomplished by Jesus Christ on the cross?”*
* The words printed as quotations, within inverted commas, are transcribed
rom \ate authors. I am not willing to name them.
AN ANTINOMIAN AND HIS FRIEND. 267
Friend.—I believe, that, by that one offering, he made a
full satisfaction for the sins of the whole world.
Ant.—But do you believe that “Christ’s blood and our
sins went away together?”
Friend.—To say the truth, I do not understand it.
Ant.—No ! Why, did not Christ, “when he was upon the
cross, take away, put an end to, blot out, and utterly destroy,
all our sins for ever?”
Friend.—He did then pay the price, for the sake of which,
all who truly believe in him are now saved from their sins;
and, if they endure to the end, shall be saved everlastingly.
Is this what you mean?
Ant.—I mean, He did then “heal, take away, put an end
to, and utterly destroy, all our sins.”
Friend.—Did he then heal the wound before it was made,
and put an end to our sins before they had a beginning?
This is so glaring, palpable an absurdity, that I cannot
conceive how you can swallow it.
Ant.—I thought you would come to your “carnal reason
ing.” What has faith to do with reasoning?
Friend.—Do you ever read the Bible? Does not God himself
say to sinners, “Come now, and let us reason together?”
(Isaiah i. 18.) Does not our Lord reason continually with the
Scribes and Pharisees; St. Peter with the Jews; (Acts ii. 14,
&c.;) and St. Paul both with the Jews and Gentiles? Nay,
is not great part of his Epistles, both to the Romans and to
the Galatians, and the far greatest part of that to the Hebrews,
one entire chain of reasoning?
Ant.—You may do what you please. But I do not reason;
I believe.
Friend.—Now, I believe and reason too: For I find no
inconsistency between them. And I would just as soon put
out my eyes to secure my faith, as lay aside my reason.
Ant.—But do not men abuse their reason continually?
Therefore it is best to have nothing to do with it.
Friend.—So, now you are doing the very thing you con
demn ! You are reasoning against reasoning. And no
wonder; for it is impossible, without reasoning, either to
prove or disprove any thing.
Ant.—But can you deny the fact? Do not men abuse their
reason continually?
Friend.—They do. The fact I deny not. But I deny the
268 DIALOGUE BETWEEN
inference drawn from it. For if we must lay aside whatever
men abuse continually, we must lay aside the Bible; nay, and
meat and drink too.
Ant.—Well, but come to the point. In what do you trust
for justification and salvation?
Friend.—In the alone merits of Christ, which are mine, if
I truly believe that he loved me, and gave himself for me.
Ant.—If! So you make salvation conditional !
Friend.—And do not you? Else you make God a liar:
For his express words are, “He that believeth shall be
saved; he that believeth not shall be damned.” What is
this but to say, If thou believest, (there is the condition,)
thou shalt be saved ?
Ant.—But I do not like that word, condition.
Friend.—Then find a better, and we will lay it aside.
Ant.—However, I insist upon it, “nothing else beside
faith is required” in order to justification and salvation.
Friend.—What do you mean by nothing else is required?
Ant—I mean, “there is but one duty, which is that of
believing. One must do nothing, but quietly attend the voice
of the Lord. The gates of heaven are shut upon workers,
and open to believers. If we do nothing for heaven, we do
as much as God requires.”
Friend.—Do you really mean, we are to do nothing, in
order to present or final salvation, but “only to believe?”
Ant.—Do not I tell you so? “To believe certainly, that
Christ suffered death for us, is enough; we want no more.
We are justified by our submitting in our judgments to
the truth of God’s grace in Christ Jesus. It is not neces
sary that a man do any works, that he may be justified and
saved. God doth not require thee to do anything, that thou
mayest be saved or justified. The law sets thee to work;
but the gospel binds thee to do nothing at all. Nay, the
works are not only not required, but forbidden. God forbids
us to work for justification. And when the Apostle Paul
presses men to believe, it is as much as if he had bid them
not to work.”
Friend.—Let Paul be permitted to answer for himself. In
the twenty-sixth chapter of the Acts of the Apostles, he relates
how our Lord sent him “to open the eyes of the Gentiles,—
that they might receive remission of sins.” (Verses 17, 18.)
“Whereupon,” saith he, “I was not disobedient to the
AN ANTINOMIAN AND HIS FRIEND. 269
heavenly vision; but showed—to the Gentiles, that they should
repent, and turn to God, and do works meet for repentance.”
Observe: He “obeyed the heavenly vision,” by teaching the
Gentiles, before they were justified, before they had “received
forgiveness of sins,” to “repent and do works meet for repent
ance.”. So far was he from “bidding them not to work,”
while he was “pressing them to believe.”
Ant.—You are got to your “carnal reasoning” again.
Friend.—Carnal reasoning, I perceive, is a cant term, which
you use when you know not what else to say. But I have
not done with this instance yet. Did St. Paul, indeed,
preach to those Heathens according to the instructions given
him from heaven, or did he not?
Ant.—Without doubt, he did; otherwise he would have
been “disobedient unto the heavenly vision.”
Friend.—How then say you that a Minister of Christ ought
to preach nothing but “Believe, believe?” and, that to tell
men of doing anything, is “preaching the law?” Do you not
herein condemn, not only the great Apostle, but also Him
that sent and commanded him “thus to preach?”
Ant.—Why, surely, you would not have us to be “under
the law !”
Friend.—I fear you know not what that expression means.
St. Paul uses it thrice in his Epistle to the Romans, five
times in that to the Galatians, and in one passage of his
former Epistle to the Corinthians; where he declares in what
sense he was himself “under the law,” and in what sense he
was not. “Unto them that are under the law,” (that still
adhere to the whole Jewish dispensation,) “I became as under
the law,” (I conformed to their ceremonies,) “that I might
gain them that are under the law . But unto them that are
without the law,” (unto the Gentiles or Heathens,) “as
without the law: Being,” meantime, “not without law to
God, but under the law to Christ.” (1 Cor. ix. 20, 21.) It is
plain, therefore, the Apostle was “under the law” of Christ,
though he was not “under the law” of ceremonies.
Ant.—But does not St. Paul say to the believers at Rome,
“Ye are not under the law, but under grace?”
Friend.—He does; and his meaning is, “Ye are not under
the Jewish, but the gracious Christian, dispensation:” As
also in the next verse, where he says, “We are not under the
law, but under grace.”
270 DIALOGUE BETW s, EN
Ant.—But what does he mean, when he says to the
Galatians, “Before faith came, we were kept under the law?”
Friend.—Doubtless he means, we were kept under the
Jewish dispensation, till we believed in Christ. (iii. 19.) And
so we read in the next chapter, “When the fulness of time
was come, God sent forth his Son, made under the law,” (the
Jewish dispensation,) “to redeem them that were under the
law, that we might receive the adoption of sons;” (verses 4,
5;) might serve God, without fear, in righteousness and
holiness, with a free, loving, child-like spirit.
Ant.—You cannot persuade me to this; I know better.
The law of works (the moral law, as you call it) is nothing
to me. “From any demand of the law, no man is obliged
to go one step, to give away one farthing, to eat, or omit one
morsel. For what did our Lord do with the law He
abolished it.”
Friend.—However, ought not we, after we believe in him,
to obey all the commandments of Christ?
Ant.—Obey law / works / commandments / O what “legal
ness is in your spirit !” So, I suppose, “your comforts
vanish away when you are not assured that you obey all
Christ’s commandments !” On the contrary, “a spiritual
man beholdeth justifying grace in believing, without his
obedience to commands for external worship and good works.”
Friend.—But how does this agree with numberless texts of
Scripture? in particular, with those words of our Lord, “Think
not that I am come to destroy” (or abolish) “the law: I am
not come to destroy, but to fulfil. For verily I say unto you,
Till heaven and earth pass, one jot or one tittle shall in nowise
pass from the law. Whosoever, therefore, shall break one of
these least commandments, he shall be called the least in the
kingdom of heaven.” (Matt. v. 17, &c.)
Ant.—I tell you plainly, I will not reason.
Friend.—That is as much as to say, “I will not be con
vinced: I love darkness rather than light.”
Ant.—No; it is you that are in darkness. I was so till a few
weeks since. But now my eyes are opened. I see my liberty
now. Now I am free. I was in bondage long enough.
Friend.—What are you free from ?
Ant.—From sin, and hell, and the devil, and the law.
Friend.—You put the law of God in goodly company.
But how came you to be free from the law 7
%
%
AN ANTINOMIAN AND HIS FRIEND. 271
Ant.—Christ made me free from it.
Friend.—What I from his own law? Pray, where is that
written?
Ant.—Here, Galatians iii. 13: “Christ hath redeemed us
from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us.”
Friend.—What is this to the purpose? This tells me, that
“Christ hath redeemed us” (all that believe) “from the
curse,” or punishment, justly due to our past transgressions
of God’s law, But it speaks not a word of redeeming us from
the law, any more than from love or heaven.
But what do you mean by bondage?
Ant—Why, the being bound to keep the law.
Friend.—You have no tittle of Scripture for this. Bond
age to fear and bondage to sin are mentioned there; and
bondage to the ceremonial law of Moses: But, according
to your sense of the word, all the angels in heaven are in
bondage. , Ant.—Well, I am not bound. St. Paul himself says to
believers, “Why are ye subject to ordinances?” (Col.
ii. 20.)
Friend.—True; that is, Why are you Christian believers
subject to Jewish ordinances? such as those which are
mentioned in the very next verse, “Touch not, taste not,
handle not.”
Ant.—Nay, that is not all. I say, “Outward things do
nothing avail to salvation.” This is plain; for “if love to
God, and love to our neighbour, and relieving the poor, be
altogether unprofitable and unavailable either to justification
or salvation; then these outward works, in submitting to
outward ordinances, are much less available.”
Friend.—Do you speak of the ordinances of Christ?
Ant.—I do. “They bring in the most dangerous kind of
Popery, and pervert the pure gospel of Christ, who persuade
men, that if they do not submit to the ordinances of the Lord
Jesus, he will not confess them before his Father.” And I
affirm, “it is better not to practise outward ordinances at all,
than to practise them on these gospel-destroying principles,
to the ruining of our souls.”
Friend.—What scripture do you produce for this?
Ant.—I wish you would not build so much upon the
letter: It is your letter-learning too makes you talk of
inherent righteousness.
*
272 DIALOGUE BETWEEN
Friend.—Do you say then, a believer has no inherent
righteousness?
Ant.—That I do. I say, “God will save us to the utmost,
without any righteousness or holiness of our own.” To look
for inherent righteousness, “is to deny the Spirit, and trample
under foot the blood of the covenant. Believers have not
any inherent righteousness in them. Our righteousness is
nothing but the imputation of the righteousness of Christ.”
Friend.—Now, I believe that Christ by his Spirit works
righteousness in all those to whom faith is imputed for
righteousness.
Ant.—“By no means; all our righteousness is in Christ.
It is wholly imputed, not inherent. We are always righteous
in Christ, but never righteous in ourselves.”
Friend.—Is not, then, every believer righteous or holy?
Ant.—Doubtless; but he is holy in Christ, not in himself.
Friend.—Does he not live a holy life; and is he not holy of
heart 2
Ant.—Most certainly.
Friend.—Is he not, by plain consequence, holy in himself?
Ant.—No, no, in Christ only; not holy in himself: He
has no holiness at all in himself.
Friend.—Has he not in him the love of God, and of his
neighbour; yea, the whole image of God?
Ant.—He has. But this is not gospel holiness.
Friend.—What vain jangling is this ! You cavil at the
name, while you allow the whole thing I contend for. You
allow, a believer is holy both in heart and life. This is all I
mean by inherent righteousness or holiness.
Ant.—But I tell you, this is not gospel holiness. Gospel
holiness is faith.
Friend.—Stand to this, and you still give up the whole
cause. For, on your supposition, I argue thus:—Faith is
holiness or righteousness: But faith is in every believer:
Therefore, holiness or righteousness is in every believer.
Ant.—Alas, alas! I pity you. Take my word for it, you
are in utter darkness. You know nothing yet of true faith;
nothing at all about it.
Friend.—Will you then be so kind as to explain it to
me?
Ant.—I will. I will make it as clear as the sun. I will show
you the very marrow of that doctrine which “I recommend,
A N ANTINOMIAN AND HIS FRIEND. 273
with all my heart, to all, as the most wholesome doctrine of
Jesus Christ.
“Many think they know it, when they have but crude,
carnal, indigested notions of it. And they imagine we rest
contented with such a faith as theirs; namely, that Christ has
died to ward off the wrath of God, to purchase his favour, and,
as an effect of that, to obtain certain inherent qualities and
dispositions, to make us meet for the kingdom of heaven.
Was this our faith, it would be requisite to seek after this sort
of sanctification, and not to be at rest, without we felt some
thing of it. But, on the contrary, we believe that the blood
shed upon the cross has put away and blotted out all our sins,
and that then there was an everlasting righteousness brought
in : By believing which, our hearts and consciences are made
as perfectly clean as though we had never sinned. In this
consists true purity of soul, and not in habitual qualities.
And whoso are thus made pure and perfect are delivered
from the dominion of sin. They do also bear forth the fruits
of righteousness, not in order to become more holy, but
because they are perfectly holy, through faith. It is true,
we have still the vile, sinful body, which continually disposes
the mind to evil. But the blood of Jesus makes us free
from sin, and, as it were, destroys the connexion.”
Friend.—Of all the accounts I have ever yet heard, this is
the most “crude and indigested.” But let us go over it step
by step. You first described what you judge a false faith,
viz., “A faith that Christ hath died, to ward off” (or appease)
“the wrath of God, and to purchase his favour;” (suppose,
for me, a lost sinner;) “and as an effect of that,” (of God’s
favour bought with the blood of Christ,) “to obtain” for
me “certain inherent qualities and dispositions, to make me
meet for the kingdom of heaven.” Now, how do you prove
this to be a false faith?
Ant.—Easily enough : for men “are obliged to support it
by frames, feelings, and works.”
Friend.—And did not you allow, just now, that whoever
has true faith is “holy both in heart and life?” that he has
in him “the love of God and of his neighbour; yea, the
whole image of God?”
Ant.—l did. And what then?
Friend.—Why, then you have abundantly confuted your
self: For you have allowed, that true faith not only cannot
VOL. X. T
274 DIALOGUE BETWEEN
be supported, but cannot exist, no, not for one moment,
without “certain inherent qualities and dispositions,” (viz.,
the love of God and of all mankind,) “which makes us
meet for the kingdom of heaven.” You have allowed, that
true faith cannot subsist without a holy frame of heart, a
continuance in good works, and a feeling sense of God’s love
to me, a sinner.
Ant.—I hear you. Go on.
Friend.—You said next, “Was this our faith, it would
be requisite to seek after this sort of sanctification.” From
your own words it appears, that this is your faith, if you have
any true faith at all. See then that you “seek after this sort
of sanctification,” viz., the love of God and of your neighbour.
For if you can be at rest, though you feel nothing of it, it is
plain your heart is not clean, but hardened.
Ant.—You may say what you please. You know no better.
Friend.—You went on: “On the contrary, we believe that
the blood shed upon the cross has put away and blotted out
all our sins.” Why, who believes otherwise? If you mean
only, that Christ then put away the punishment of all our
sins, who believe in him; what a marvellous discovery is
this ! I pray, whom doth this arguing reprove?
Ant.—It reproves you, who deny that “an everlasting
righteousness was then brought in.”
Friend.—I do not deny it: No more than you understand
it. But I ask, in what sense was it “brought in ?” What
was it brought into? Was it then first brought into the
world? You cannot say this, without saying that all who
went out of the world before that hour were lost. Or was it
brought into the souls of believers? Then believers have an
inward or inherent righteousness. You had better, therefore,
let this text alone. It will do no service at all to your cause.
Ant.—I see plain you are as blind as a beetle still. I am
afraid your head-knowledge will destroy you. Did not I tell
you, “Our hearts and consciences are made perfectly clean
by our believing; and that in this consists true purity of
soul, and not in habitual qualities? Thus we are made per
fectly holy.” And though “the vile, sinful body continually
disposes the mind to evil,” yet “the blood of Christ makes
us free from sin, and, as it were, destroys the connexion.”
Friend.—Destroys the connexion of what? I doubt you
have stumbled upon another word which you do not under
AN ANTINOMIAN AN I/ HIS FRIEND, 275
stand. But whether you understand yourself or no, it is
sure I do not understand you. How can my mind at the
same time it is “continually disposed to evil,” be “free from
sin, perfectly clean, perfectly holy?”
Ant.—O the dulness of some men ' I do not mean really
holy, but holy by imputation. I told you plainly, the holi
ness of which we speak is not in us, but in Christ. “The
fruits of the Spirit, (commonly called sanctification,) such as
love, gentleness, longsuffering, goodness, meekness, temper
ance, neither make us holy before God, nor in our own
consciences.”
Friend.—I know these cannot atone for one sin. This is
done by the blood of Christ alone: For the sake of which,
God forgives, and works these in us by faith. Do I reach
your meaning now?
Ant.-No, no; I wonder at your ignorance. I mean, “we
are not made good or holy by any inward qualities or dispo
sitions: But being made pure and holy in our consciences,
by believing in Christ, we bear forth, inwardly and outwardly,
the fruits of holiness.” Now, I hope, you understand me.
Friend.—I hope not. For, if I do, you talk as gross nonsense
and contradiction as ever came out of the mouth of man.
Ant.—How so?
Friend.—You say, “We are not made good or holy by
any inward qualities or dispositions.” No | are we not made
good by inward goodness? (observe, we are not speaking of
justification, but sanctification;) holy, by inward holiness?
meek, by inward meekness? gentle, by inward gentleness?
And are not all these, if they are anything at all, “inward
qualities or dispositions?”
Again: Just after denying that we have any inward holi
ness, you say, “We are made holy in our consciences, and
bear forth, inwardly and outwardly, the fruits of holiness.”
What heaps of self-contradictions are here !
Ant.—You do not take me right. I mean, these inward
dispositions “are not our holiness. For we are not more
holy, if we have more love to God and man, nor less holy, if
we have less.”
Friend.—No ! Does not a believer increase in holiness, as
he increases in the love of God and man?
Ant.—I say, No. “The very moment he is justified, he is
wholly sanctified. And he is neither more nor less holy, from
T2
276 SECOND DIALOGUE BETWEEN
that hour, to the day of his death. Entire justification and
entire sanctification are in the same instant. And neither of
them is thenceforth capable either of increase or decrease.
Friend.—I thought we were to grow in grace!
Ant.—“We are so; but not in holiness. The moment we
are justified, we are as pure in heart as ever we shall be. A
new-born babe is as pure in heart as a father in Christ.
There is no difference.”
Friend.—You do well to except against Scripture and
reason. For till a man has done with them, he can never
swallow this. I understand your doctrine now, far better
than I like it. In the main, you are talking much and
saying nothing; labouring, as if you had found out the most
important truths, and such as none ever knew before. And
what does all this come to at the last? A mere, empty
“strife of words.” All that is really uncommon in your
doctrine is a heap of broad absurdities, in most of which you
grossly contradict yourselves, as well as Scripture and common
sense. In the meantime, you boast and vapour, as if “ye
were the men, and wisdom should die with you.” I pray
God to “humble you, and prove you, and show you what is
in your hearts l”
A.
SEC ON D DIAL O GUE
IBETWEEN
AN ANTINOMIAN AND HIS FRIEND.
“Do we then make void the law through faith ? God forbid : Yea, we establish
the law.” (Romans iii. 31.)
FRIEND.—WELL met ! You have had time to consider.
What think you of our last conference?
ANTINoMIAN.—I think, “the giving of scandalous names
has no warrant from Scripture.” (Mr. Cudworth's Dialogue,
p. 2.)
Friend.—Scandalous names 1
AN ANTINOMIAN AND H IS FRIEND. 277
Ant.—Yes; you called me Antinomian. But “our Saviour
bids me not return railing for railing.” (Ibid.)
Friend.—St. Peter does, and that is all one. But how is that
a scandalous name? I think it is properly your own; for it
means, “one that speaks against the law.” And this you did
at that time very largely. But pray what would you have
me call you?
Ant.—“A Preacher of God’s righteousness.” (Ibid.,
page 1.)
Friend.—What do you call me then?
Ant.—“A Preacher of inherent righteousness.” (Ibid.)
Friend.—That is, in opposition to God’s righteousness. So
you mean, a Preacher of such righteousness as is inconsistent
with that righteousness of God which is by faith.
Ant.—True: For, “I plainly perceive you know but one
sort of righteousness, that is, the righteousness of inherent
qualities, dispositions, and works. And this is the reason why
the language of the Holy Ghost seems foolishness unto you;
even because the natural man receiveth not the things of the
Spirit of God.” (Ibid., pages 11, 12.)
Friend.—Are you absolutely sure that this is the reason
why I do not think or speak as you do?
Ant.—The thing itself speaks: “Thou hast forgotten the
Lord, and hast trusted in falsehood. Therefore, saith the
Lord, I will discover thy skirts upon thy face, that thy shame
may appear.” (Ibid., page 1.)
Friend.—Peremptory enough ! But you will “not return
railing for railing!” so, out of mere tenderness and respect,
you pronounce me a “natural man,” and one who “ hath
forgotten the Lord,” and hath “trusted in falsehood l’”
Ant.—And so you are, if you do not believe in Christ.
Pray let me ask you one question: Do you believe that “Christ
hath appeared, to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself?”
Friend.—I do.
Ant.—But in what sense?
Friend.—I believe he made, by that one oblation of him
self, once offered, a full, perfect, and sufficient sacrifice,
oblation, and satisfaction for the sins of the whole world.
And yet he hath not “dome all which was necessary for the”
absolute, infallible, inevitable “ salvation of the whole world.”
If he had, the whole world would be saved; whereas, “he
that believeth not shall be damned.”
278 SECONID DIALOGUE BETWEEN
Ant.—But is it not said, “‘He was wounded for our trans
gressions, and with his stripes we are healed?’ And is he
not ‘the Lamb of God, that taketh away the sins of the
world?’” (Page 4.)
Friend.—Yes. But this does not prove that he “put an
end to our sins before they had a beginning !” (Ibid.)
Ant.—O ignorance ! Did not our sins begin in Adam?
Friend.—Original sin did. But Christ will not put an
end to this before the end of the world. And, as to actual,
if I now feel anger at you in my heart, and it breaks out in
reproachful words; to say Christ put an end to this sin
before it began, is a glaring absurdity.
Ant.—But I say, “God was in Christ, reconciling the
world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them.
He hath made him sin for us, who knew no sin, that we
might be made the righteousness of God in him.” And St.
Peter says, “Who his own self bare our sins in his body on
the tree.”
Friend.—To what purpose do you heap these texts together?
to prove that Christ “put an end to our sins” before they
had a beginning? If not, spare your labour; for they are
quite foreign to the present question.
Ant.—However, that is not foreign to the present ques
tion, which you said the other day; viz., that “Christ has
only redeemed us from the punishment due to our past
transgressions.” (Ibid.)
Friend.—I neither said so, northought so. You either care
lessly or wilfully misrepresent my words. On your quoting
that text, “Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the
law,” I replied in these terms: “What is this to the pur
pose? This tells me that Christ hath redeemed us (all that
believe) from the curse or punishment justly due to our past
transgressions of God's law. But it speaks not a word of
redeeming us from the law, any more than from love or
heaven.” (First Dialogue, page 271.)
Ant.—Past transgressions ! “Then who must redeem us
from those which are to come, since there remains no more
sacrifice for sin?” (Cudworth’s Dialogue.)
Friend.—The same Jesus Christ, by the same merit of that
one sacrifice, then applied to the conscience when we believe,
as you yourself have often asserted. But whatever punish
ment he redeems us from, that punishment supposes sin to
AN ANTINOMIAN AND HIS FRIEND. 279
precede; which must exist first, before there is any possibility
of its being either punished or pardoned.
Ant.—You have a strange way of talking. You say, “We
are forgiven for the sake of the blood of Christ.” (Ibid., page 5.)
Friend.—And do not you?
Ant.—No ; I say, “We have forgiveness in his blood, and
not merely for the sake of it.”
Friend.—You are perfectly welcome so to say.
Ant.—Well, enough of this. Let me ask you another
question. Do you affirm, that salvation is “conditional?”
(Ibid.)
Friend.—I affirm, “He that believeth shall be saved, and
he that believeth not shall be damned.” And can you or
any other deny this? If not, why do you fight about a word?
especially after I have told you, “Find me a better, and I
will lay this aside.”
Ant.—“Then this faith leaves you just in the same state
it found you; that is, still having the condition to perform.”
(Ibid., page 5.)
Friend.—Not so; for faith itself is that condition.
Ant.—Nay, “faith is only necessary in order to receive
forgiveness or salvation; not to procure it by way of condi
tion.” (Ibid.)
Friend.—Enough, enough. You grant all that I desire.
If you allow that “faith is necessary in order to receive
forgiveness or salvation,” this is the whole of what I mean
by terming it a condition. A procuring or meritorious
cause is quite another thing.
Ant.—But you say that “faith is not true faith, unless it
be furnished with love.” (Ibid., page 6.)
Friend.—Furnished with love! Where did you pick up
that awkward phrase? I never used it in my life. But I
say, you have not true faith, unless your faith “worketh by
iove;” and that though “I have all faith, so that I could
even remove mountains, yet if I have no love I am nothing.”
Ant.—Will you answer me one question more? Is not a
believer free from the law P
Friend.—He is free from the Jewish ceremonial law; that
is, he does not, and need not, observe it. And he is free
from the curse of the moral law; but he is not free from
observing it. He still walks according to this rule, and so
much the more, because God has written it in his heart.
280 SECON to DIALOGUE BETWEEN
Ant.—But St. Paul says, “Christ is the end of the law for
righteousness to every one that believeth.” (Ibid., page 8.)
Friend.—He is so. He put an end to the Mosaic dispen
sation, and established a better covenant, in virtue whereof
“faith is counted for righteousness to every one that believeth.”
Ant.—But still “as many as are of the works of the law
are under the curse,” (Gal. iii. 10,) are they not?
Friend.—They are; as many as still “seek to be justified
by the works of the law;” that is, by any works antecedent
to, or independent on, faith in Christ.
Ant.—“But does not the Apostle say farther, ‘Ye are
become dead to the law?’ (Rom. vii. 4.)” (Ibid.)
Friend.—You are so, as to its condemning power, if you
truly believe in Christ. For “there is no condemnation to
them which are in Christ Jesus.” But not as to its directing
power; for you “walk not after the flesh, but after the
Spirit.” You “love him, and keep his commandments.”
Ant.—That is not all. I maintain, “a believer is entirely
free from the law.” (Ibid.)
Friend.—By what scripture do you prove that?
Ant.—By Gal. iv. 4, 5: “God sent forth his Son, made
under the law, to redeem them that were under the law.”
Friend.—The plain meaning of this I mentioned before:
“‘God sent forth his Son, made under the law,’ (the Jewish
dispensation,) ‘to redeem them that were under the law,
that we might receive the adoption of sons; ’ might ‘serve
God without fear, in righteousness and holiness, with a free,
loving, child-like spirit.” (First Dialogue, page 270.)
Ant.—So you say, “Christ was made only under the
Jewish dispensation, to redeem the Jews from that dispen
sation.” (Cudworth's Dialogue, pages 8, 9.)
Friend.—I do not say so. By inserting “only” you quite
pervert my words. You cannot deny, that Christ “was
made under the Jewish dispensation.” But I never affirmed,
He was “made under it only to redeem the Jews from
that dispensation.”
Ant.—Was he made “under the moral law” at all?
Friend.—No doubt he was. For the Jewish dispensation
included the moral, as well as ceremonial, law.
Ant.—Then the case is plain. “If he was under the
moral law, we are redeemed from the moral law.” (Ibid.)
Friend.—That does not follow. “He redeemed them that
AN ANTINOM1AN AND HIS FRIEND. 281
were under” this, as well as the ceremonial, “law.” But from
what did he redeem them? Not “from the law;” but “from
guilt, and sin, and hell.” In other words, He redeemed
them from the “condem nation of this law,” not from “obedi
ence to it.” In this respect they are still, “not without law
to God, but under the law to Christ.” (1 Cor. ix. 21.)
Ant.—“‘Under the law to Christ !” No. The Greek
word is swowo; Xpis?, in a law to Christ; that is, the law of
love and liberty.” (Ibid.)
Friend.—Very true. This is the exact thing I mean.
You have spoken the very thought of my heart.
Ant.—It may be so. But “a believer is free from the law
of commandments,” call it moral, or what you please.
Friend.—Do you mean only, that he obeys the law of Christ,
by free choice, and not by constraint? that he keeps the com
mandments of God, out of love, not fear? If so, you may tri
umph without an opponent. But if you mean, he is free from
obeying that law, then your liberty is a liberty to disobey God.
Ant.—God forbid. It is “a liberty to walk in the Spirit,
and not fulfil the lust (or desire) of the flesh.” (Ibid., page 8.)
Friend.—Why, this is the thing I am contending for. The
very thing I daily assert is this, that Christian liberty is a
liberty to obey God, and not to commit sin.
Ant.—But how do you understand those words of St.
Paul, that Christ “blotted out the hand-writing of ordi.
nances that was against us, which was contrary to us, and
took it out of the way?” (Col. ii. 14.)
Friend.—I understand them of the Jewish ordinances; as
it is plain St. Paul himself did, by the inference he immediately
draws: “Let no man therefore judge you in meat or in drink,”
(the ordinances touching these being now “taken out of the
way,”) “ or in respect of an holy-day,” (once observed,) “ or of
the new moon, or of the’’ (Jewish) “Sabbaths.” (Verse 16.)
Ant.—But how could the “hand-writing” of these “ordi
nances” be said to be “against us,” or to be “contrary to us?”
Friend.—I will not insist on the criticism of those who render
the words, “over against us,” as alluding to that “hand-writing
on the wall” which appeared “over against King Belshazzar.”
The words of St. Peter suffice, which will bear no dispute, who,
speaking of these same ordinances, calls them “a yoke which
neither our fathers nor we were able to bear.” (Acts xv. 5, 10.)
Ant.—You must then understand those words of our
282 SECOND DIALOGUE BETWEEN
Lord, of the moral law alone: “Think not that I am come
to destroy the Law or the Prophets: I am not come to
destroy, but to fulfil. For verily I say unto you, Till heaven
and earth pass, one jot or one tittle shall in nowise pass from
the law, till all be fulfilled.” (Matt. v. 17, 18.) But I say,
our Lord has fulfilled every jot and tittle of this law too.
Friend.—I grant he has. But do you infer from thence,
“therefore he has destroyed the law?” Our Lord’s arguing
is the very reverse of yours. He mentions his coming to
“fulfil the law,” as an evident proof that he did not come to
“destroy” or “take it away.”
But suppose you could get over the former verse, what can
you do with the following?—“Verily I say unto you, One jot
or one tittle shall in nowise pass from the law, till heaven and
earth pass;” or, which comes to the same thing, “till all be
fulfilled.” The former evasion will do you no service with
regard to this clause. For the word “all” in this does not
refer to the law, but to heaven and earth and “all things”
therein: The original sentence running thus: Ews ay wravia
ysvara. Nor indeed is the word 'yevnrx well rendered by
the ambiguous word “fulfilled,” which would easily induce an
English reader to suppose it was the same word that was ren
dered so just before; it should rather be translated accom
plished, finished, or done; as they will be in the great and
terrible day of the Lord, when the “earth and the heaven shall
flee from his face, and there shall be no place found for them.”
Ant.—But why did you say, my account of sanctification
was crude and indigested? (First Dialogue, page 273.)
Friend.—Let me. hear it again. If it be better digested
than it was, I shall rejoice.
Ant.—“Our minds are either defiled and impure, or pure
and holy. The question is, Which way is a defiled and impure
mind to be made a good one? You say, “By love, meekness,
gentleness.’ I say, By believing in Christ. By this, my
conscience becomes purged and clean, as though I had not
committed sin. And such a purged conscience bears forth the
fruit of love, meekness, gentleness, &c. It is therefore absurd
to say, We are made good by goodness, meek by meekness,
or gentle by gentleness. We are only denominated so from
these fruits of the Spirit.” (Cudworth’s Dialogue, page 10.)
Friend.—You have mended the matter a little, and not
much.
AN ANTINOMIAN AND HIS FRIEND. 283
For, 1. “The question,” say you, “is, Which way is a
defiled and impure mind to be made a good one?” Nothing
less. The present question between you and me is this, and
no other, Has a believer any goodness in him at all? any love,
meekness, or gentleness? 2. “You say, An impure mind is
made good by goodness, &c. I say, By believing in Christ.”
This is mere playing upon words. If the question stood thus,
“Which way is an evil mind made good P” you are conscious
I should make the very same reply,–“By believing in Jesus
Christ.” 3. “By this my conscience becomes purged and clean,
as though I had not committed sin.” Here you run away
from the question, notwithstanding that express caution,
“Observe, we are not speaking of justification, but sanctifica
tion.” (First Dialogue, page 275.) 4. “And such a purged
conscience bears forth the fruit of love, meekness, gentle
ness,” &c. You here give up the cause. You grant all I
desire, viz., that “there are these dispositions in all
believers.” It avails nothing therefore to add, “But we are
not made good by goodness, or gentle by gentleness. We
are only denominated good or gentle from these fruits of the
Spirit; ” since a believer can neither be made nor denomi
nated so, without having goodness or gentleness in him.
Ant.—Then how dare you affirm, that a believer in Christ
“is not really holy?”
Friend.—You have forgotten yourself. I affirm that he is.
If you affirm so too, our dispute is at an end. For if he is
really holy, then he is inwardly or inherently holy. And if
you grant this, you may express it as you please. I have no
leisure for strife of words.
Ant.—But why will not you cut off all occasion of such
strife, by speaking as I do?
Friend.—I cannot in conscience speak in the way that you
do; and that for several plain reasons: (Even setting aside
that main consideration, whether the things you speak be
right or wrong:)
1. Because it is a confused way of speaking; so that
unless a man has both a clear apprehension, and a large
measure of patience, he will hardly find out any consistent
meaning in what you say.
2. Because it is an insincere way of speaking. For you
seem to mean what you do not.
3. Because it is an unscriptural way of speaking: The
284 SERIOUS THOUGHTS UPON
Scriptures both of the Old and New Testament speaking,
frequently and expressly, both of holiness, of good works, of
the law and the commandments of God, as expressly and
frequently to the full, as of believing in Jesus Christ.
4. Because by experience I find, it is a dangerous way of
speaking, and that, both to the speaker and to the hearers:
To the speaker, as it has a peculiar tendency to puff him up,
to engénder pride; to make him exalt himself, (under
pretence of exalting the grace of God,) and despise others:
To the hearers, as it keeps many who are before our eyes
from ever awaking out of the sleep of death; as it throws
others again into that fatal slumber, who were just beginning
to awake; as it stops many in the midst of their Christian
course, and turns others clear out of the way; yea, and
plunges not a few into all the wretchedness of unclean living.
In consideration of this, I the more earnestly desire, when I
speak on this head in particular, to “speak as the oracles of
God;” to express scriptural sense in scriptural words; in every
phrase I use, to keep as close as I can to “the law and the
testimony;” being convinced there are no words so fit to
express the deep things of God, as those which “holy men of
old spake” when “they were moved by the Spirit of God.”
LoNDoN,
August 24, 1745.
SERIOUS THOUGHTS
UPoN
THE PERSEVER ANCE OF THE SAINTS.
1. MANY large volumes have been already published on
this important subject. But the very length of them makes
them hard to be understood, or even purchased, by common
readers. A short, plain treatise on this head is what serious
men have long desired, and what is here offered to those
whom God has endowed with love and meekness of wisdom.
THE PERSEVERANCE OF THE SAINTS. 2S5
2. By the saints, I understand, those who are holy or
righteous in the judgment of God himself; those who are
endued with the faith that purifies the heart, that produces a
good conscience; those who are grafted into the good olive
tree, the spiritual, invisible Church; those who are branches
of the true vine, of whom Christ says, “I am the vine, ye are
the branches;” those who so effectually know Christ, as by
that knowledge to have escaped the pollutions of the world;
those who see the light of the glory of God in the face of
Jesus Christ, and who have been made partakers of the Holy
Ghost, of the witness and the fruits of the Spirit; those who
live by faith in the Son of God; those who are sanctified by
the blood of the covenant; those to whom all or any of these
characters belong, I mean by the term saints.
3. Can any of these fall away? By falling away, we mean,
not barely falling into sin. This, it is granted, they may.
But can they fall totally? Can any of these so fall from
God as to perish everlastingly ?
4. I am sensible either side of this question is attended
with great difficulties; such as reason alone could never
remove. Therefore, “to the law and to the testimony.”
Let the living oracles decide: And if these speak for us, we
neither seek nor want farther witness.
5. On this authority, 1 believe a saint may fall away; that
one who is holy or righteous in the judgment of God himself
may nevertheless so fall from God as to perish everlastingly.
I. For thus saith the Lord: “When the righteous turneth
away from his righteousness, and committeth iniquity; in his
trespass that he hath trespassed, and in his sin that he hath
sinned, in them shall he die.” (Ezek. xviii. 24.)
That this is to be understood of eternal death appears from
the twenty-sixth verse: “When a righteous man turneth
away from his righteousness and committeth iniquity, and
dieth in them;” (here is temporal death;) “for his iniquity
that he hath done he shall die.” (Here is death eternal.)
It appears farther from the whole scope of the chapter, which
is to prove, “The soul that sinneth, it shall die.” (Verse 4.)
If you say, “The soul here means the body,” I answer,
That will die whether you sin or no.
6. Again, thus saith the Lord: “When I shall say to the
righteous, that he shall surely live; if he trust to his own
righteousness,” (yea, or to that promise as absolute and
286 SERIOUS THOUGHTS UPON
unconditional,) “and commit iniquity, all his righteousness
shall not be remembered; but for the iniquity that he hath
committed shall he die.” (xxxiii. 13.)
Again: “When the righteous turneth from his righteous
ness, and committeth iniquity, he shall even die thereby.”
(Verse 18.)
Therefore, one who is holy and righteous in the judgment
of God himself may yet so fall as to perish everlastingly.
7. “But how is this consistent with what God declared
elsewhere: ‘If his children forsake my law, and walk not in
my judgments,—I will visit their offences with the rod, and
their sin with scourges. Nevertheless, my lovingkindness
will I not utterly take from him, nor suffer my truth to fail.
My covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is
gone out of my lips. I have sworn once by my holiness, that
I will not fail David.’” (Psalm lxxxix. 30–35.)
I answer, There is no manner of inconsistency between
one declaration and the other. The Prophet declares the
just judgment of God against every righteous man who falls
from his righteousness. The Psalmist declares the old loving
kindnesses which God sware unto David in his truth. “I
have found,” saith he, “David, my servant; with my holy
oil have I anointed him. My hand shall hold him fast, and
my arm shall strengthen him. His seed also will I make to
endure for ever, and his throne as the days of heaven.”
(Verses 20, 21, 29.) It follows: “But if his children forsake
my law, and walk not in my judgments;—nevertheless, my
lovingkindness will I not utterly take from him, nor suffer
my truth to fail. My covenant will I not break. I will not
fail David. His seed shall endure for ever, and his throne as
the sun before me.” (Verse 30, &c.)
May not every man see, that the covenant here spoken of
relates wholly to David and his seed or children? Where
then is the inconsistency between the most absolute promise
made to a particular family, and that solemn account which
God has here given of his way of dealing with all mankind?
Besides, the very covenant mentioned in these words is
not absolute, but conditional. The condition of repentance in
case of forsaking God’s law was implied, though not expressed;
and so strongly implied, that, this condition failing, not being
performed, God did also fail David. He did “alter the thing
that had gone out of his lips,” and yet without any impeach
ThE PERSEVERANCE OF THE SAINTS. 287
ment of his truth. He “abhorred and forsook his anointed,”
(verse 38,) the seed of David, whose throne, if they had
repented, should have been “as the days of heaven.” He did
“break the covenant of his servant, and cast his crown to the
ground.” (Verse 39.) So vainly are these words of the Psalmist
brought to contradict the plain, full testimony of the Prophet!
8. Nor is there any contradiction between this testimony of
God by Ezekiel, and those words which he spake by Jeremiah:
“I have loved thee with an everlasting love; therefore with
lovingkindness have I drawn thee.” For do these words
assert, that mo righteous man ever turns from his righteous
ness? No such thing. They do not touch the question, but
simply declare God’s love to the Jewish Church. To see this
in the clearest light, you need only read over the whole
sentence: “At the same time, saith the Lord, I will be the
God of all the families of Israel, and they shall be my people.
Thus saith the Lord, The people which were left of the sword
found grace in the wilderness; even Israel, when I caused
him to rest. The Lord hath appeared of old unto me,” saith
the Prophet, speaking in the person of Israel, “saying, I have
loved thee with an everlasting love: Therefore with loving
kindness have I drawn thee. Again I will build thee, and
thou shalt be built, O virgin of Israel.” (xxxi. 1–4.)
Suffer me here to observe, once for all, a fallacy which is
constantly used by almost all writers on this point. They
perpetually beg the question, by applying to particular
persons assertions, or prophecies, which relate only to the
Church in general; and some of them only to the Jewish
Church and nation, as distinguished from all other people.
If you say, “But it was particularly revealed to me, that
God had loved me with an everlasting love;” I answer,
Suppose it was, (which might bear a dispute,) it proves no
more, at the most, than that you in particular shall persevere;
but does not affect the general question, whether others shall,
or shall not.
9. Secondly. One who is endued with the faith that
purifies the heart, that produces a good conscience, may
nevertheless so fall from God as to perish everlastingly.
For thus saith the inspired Apostle, “War a good
warfare; holding faith, and a good conscience; which some
having put away concerning faith have made shipwreck.”
(1 Tim. i. 18, 19.)
288 SERIOUS THOUGHTS UPON
Observe, (1.) These men (such as Hymeneus and Alex
ander) had once the faith that purifies the heart, that
produces a good conscience; which they once had, or they
could not have “put it away.”
Observe, (2.) They “made shipwreck” of the faith, which
necessarily implies the total and final loss of it. For a vessel
once wrecked can never be recovered. It is totally and
finally lost.
And the Apostle himself, in his Second Epistle to Timothy,
mentions one of these two as irrecoverably lost. “Alexander,”
says he, “did me much evil: The Lord shall reward him
according to his works.” (2 Tim. iv. 14.) Therefore one who
is endued with the faith that purifies the heart, that produces
a good conscience, may nevertheless so fall from God as to
perish everlastingly.
10. “But how can this be reconciled with the words of
our Lord, “He that believeth shall be saved?’”
Do you think these words mean, “he that believes” at
this moment “shall” certainly and inevitably “be saved?”
If this interpretation be good, then, by all the rules of
speech, the other part of the sentence must mean, “He”
that does “not believe” at this moment, “shall” certainly
and inevitably “be damned.”
Therefore that interpretation cannot be good. The plain
meaning then of the whole sentence is, “He that believeth,”
if he continue in faith, “shall be saved; he that believeth
not,” if he continue in unbelief, “shall be damned.”
11. “But does not Christ say elsewhere, ‘He that
believeth hath everlasting life?” (John iii. 36) and, “He that
believeth on him that sent me, hath everlasting life, and
shall not come into condemnation; but is passed from death
unto life?’” (v. 24.)
I answer, (1.) The love of God is everlasting life. It is, in
substance, the life of heaven. Now every one that believes,
loves God, and therefore “hath everlasting life.”
(2) Every one that believes “is” therefore “passed from
death,” spiritual death, “unto life;” and,
(3.) “Shall not come into condemnation,” if he endureth
in the faith unto the end; according to our Lord’s own
words, “He that endureth to the end shall be saved;” and,
“Verily I say unto you, If a man keep my saying, he shall
never see death.” (John viii. 51.)
TIME PERSEVERANCE OF THE SAINTS, 289
12. Thirdly. Those who are grafted into the good olive
tree, the spiritual, invisible Church, may nevertheless so fall
from God as to perish everlastingly.
For thus saith the Apostle: “Some of the branches are
broken off, and thou art grafted in among them, and with
them partakest of the root and fatness of the olive-tree. Be
not high-minded, but fear: If God spared not the natural
branches, take heed lest he spare not thee. Behold the
goodness and severity of God! On them which fell, severity;
but toward thee, goodness, if thou continue in his goodness;
otherwise thou shalt be cut off.” (Romans xi. 17, 20–22.)
We may observe here, (1.) The persons spoken to were
actually grafted into the olive-tree.
(2.) This olive-tree is not barely the outward visible Church,
but the invisible, consisting of holy believers. So the text:
“If the firstfruit be holy, the lump is holy; and if the root be
holy, so are the branches.” (Verse 16.) And, “Because of
unbelief they were broken off, and thou standest by faith.”
(3.) These holy believers were still liable to be cut off from
the invisible Church, into which they were then grafted.
(4.) Here is not the least intimation of those who were so
cut off being ever grafted in again.
Therefore, those who are grafted into the good olive-tree,
the spiritual invisible Church, may nevertheless so fall from
God as to perish everlastingly.
13. “But how does this agree with the 29th verse, “The
gifts and calling of God are without repentance?’”
The preceding verse shows: “As touching the election”
(the unconditional election of the Jewish nation) “they are
beloved for the fathers' sake;” for the sake of their fore
fathers. It follows: (In proof of this, that “they are beloved
for the fathers' sake,” that God has still blessings in store
for the Jewish nation :) “For the gifts and calling of God
are without repentance;” for God doth not repent of any
blessings he hath given them, or any privileges he hath
called them to. The words here referred to were originally
spoken with a peculiar regard to these national blessings.
“God is not a man, that he should lie; neither the son of
man, that he should repent.” (Numb. xxiii. 19.)
14. “But do not you hereby make God changeable?
Whereas ‘with Him is no variableness, neither shadow of
turning.” (James i. 17.)” By no means. God is unchange
VOL. X. II
290 SERIOUS THOUGHTS UPON
ably holy: Therefore, he always “loveth righteousness and
hateth iniquity.” He is unchangeably good: Therefore he
pardoneth all that “repent and believe the gospel.” And he
is unchangeably just : Therefore, he “rewardeth every man
according to his works.” But all this hinders not his resisting,
when they are proud, those to whom he gave grace when
they were humble. Nay, his unchangeableness itself requires,
that, if they grow high-minded, God should cut them off;
that there should be a proportionable change in all the divine
dispensations toward them.
15. “But how then is God faithful?” I answer, In fulfil
ling every promise which he hath made, to all to whom it is
made, all who fulfil the condition of that promise. More parti
cularly, (1) “God is faithful” in that “he will not suffer you
to be tempted above that you are able to bear.” (1 Cor. x. 13.)
(2) “The Lord is faithful, to establish and keep you from evil;”
(if you put your trust in him;) from all the evil which you
might otherwise sulfer, through “unreasonable and wicked
men.” (2 Thess. iii. 2, 3.) (3) “Quench not the Spirit; hold
fast that which is good; abstain from all appearance of evil;
and your whole spirit, soul, and body shall be preserved blame
less unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. Faithful is he
that calleth you, who also will do it.” (1 Thess. v. 19, &c.)
(4.) Be not disobedient unto the heavenly calling; and “God
is faithful, by whom ye were called, to confirm you unto the
end, that ye may be blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus
Christ.” (1 Cor. i. 8, 9.) Yet, notwithstanding all this,
unless you fulfil the condition, you cannot attain the promise.
“Nay, but are not “all the promises, yea and amen?’”
They are firm as the pillars of heaven. Perform the condition,
and the promise is sure. Believe, and thou shalt be saved.
“But many promises are absolute and unconditional.” In
many, the condition is not expressed. But this does not
prove, there is none implied. No promises can be expressed
in a more absolute form, than those above cited from the
eighty-ninth Psalm. And yet we have seen, a condition was
implied even there, though none was expressed.
16. “But there is no condition, either expressed or implied,
in those words of St. Paul: “I am persuaded that neither
death, nor life, nor height, nor depth, nor any creature, shall
be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord.’” (Romans viii. 38. 39.)
THE PERSEVERANCE OF THE SAINTS. 29]
Suppose there is not, (which will bear a dispute,) yet what
will this prove? Just thus much,-that the Apostle was at
that time fully persuaded of his own perseverance. And I
doubt not, but many believers at this day have the very same
persuasion. termed in Scripture, “The full assurance of
hope.” But this does not prove that every believer shall
persevere, any more than that every believer is thus fully
persuaded of his perseverance.
IV. 17. Fourthly. Those who are branches of the true vine,
of whom Christ says, “I am the vine, ye are the branches,”
may nevertheless so fall from God as to perish everlastingly.
For thus saith our blessed Lord himself, “I am the true
vine, and my Father is the husbandman. Every branch in me
that beareth not fruit, he taketh it away. I am the vine, ye
are the branches. If a man abide not in me, he is cast forth
as a branch, and is withered; and men gather them, and cast
them into the fire, and they are burned.” (John xv. 1–6.)
Here we may observe, (1.) The persons spoken of were
in Christ, branches of the true vine : (2.) Some of these
branches abide not in Christ, but the Father taketh them away:
(3.) The branches which abide not are cast forth, cast out from
Christ and his Church: (4.) They are not only cast forth, but
withered; consequently, never grafted in again: Nay, (5.) They
are not only cast forth and withered, but also cast into the
fire: And, (6.) They are burned. It is not possible for words
more strongly to declare, that even those who are now branches
in the true vine may yet so fall as to perish everlastingly.
18. By this clear, indisputable declaration of our Lord, we
may interpret those which might be otherwise liable to
dispute; wherein it is certain, whatever he meant beside, he
did not mean to contradict himself. For example: “This
is the Father’s will, that of all which he hath given me,
I should lose nothing.” Most sure; all that God hath
given him; or, as it is expressed in the next verse, “every
one which believeth on him,” namely, to the end, he “will
raise up at the last day,” to reign with him for ever.
Again: “I am the living bread:—If any man eat of this
bread,” (by faith,) “he shall live for ever.” (John vi. 51.)
True; if he continue to eat thereof. And who can doubt
of it 2
Again: “My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and
they follow me. And I give unto them eternal life; and
U 2
292 SERIOUS THOUGHTS UPoN
they shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them out of
my hand.” (John x. 27—29.)
In the preceding text the condition is only implied; in
this it is plainly expressed. They are my sheep that hear
my voice, that follow me in all holiness. And, “If ye do
those things, ye shall never fall.” None shall “pluck you
out of my hands.”-
Again: “Having loved his own which were in the world,
he loved them unto the end.” (John xiii. 1.) “Having loved
his own,” namely, the Apostles, (as the very next words,
“which were in the world,” evidently show,) “he loved them
unto the end” of his life, and manifested that love to the last.
19. Once more: “Holy Father, keep through thine own
name those whom thou hast given me, that they may be one,
as we are one.” (John xvii. 11.)
Great stress has been laid upon this text; and it has been
hence inferred, that all those whom the Father had given
him (a phrase frequently occurring in this chapter) must
infallibly persevere to the end.
And yet, in the very next verse, our Lord himself declares
that one of those whom the Father had given him did not
persevere unto the end, but perished everlastingly.
His own words are, “Those that thou gavest me I have
kept, and none of them is lost, but the son of perdition.”
(John xvii. 12.)
So one even of these was finally lost l—a demonstration
that the phrase, “those whom thou hast given me,” signifies
here (if not in most other places too) the twelve Apostles,
and them only.
20. On this occasion, I cannot but observe another common
instance of begging the question,-of taking for granted what
ought to be proved. It is usually laid down as an indis
putable truth, that whatever our Lord speaks to or of his
Apostles is to be applied to all believers. But this cannot
be allowed by any who impartially search the Scriptures.
They cannot allow, without clear and particular proof, that
any one of those texts which related primarily to the Apostles
(as all men grant) belong to any but them.
W. 21. Fifthly. Those who so effectually know Christ, as by
that knowledge to have escaped the pollutions of the world, may
yet fall back into those pollutions, and perish everlastingly.
For thus saith the Apostle Peter, “If after they have
THE PERSEVERANCE OF THE SAINTS. 203
escaped the pollutions of the world, through the knowledge
of the Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ,” (the only possible
way of escaping them,) “they are again entangled therein
and overcome, the latter end is worse with them than the
beginning. For it had been better for them not to have
known the way of righteousness, than, after they have known
it, to turn from the holy commandment delivered unto them.”
(2 Peter ii. 20, 21.)
That the knowledge of the way of righteousness, which
they had attained, was an inward, experimental knowledge,
is evident from that other expression,-they had “escaped
the pollutions of the world;” an expression parallel to that
in the preceding chapter, verse 4: “Having escaped the
corruption which is in the world.” And in both chapters,
this effect is ascribed to the same cause; termed in the first,
“the knowledge of Him who hath called us to glory and
virtue;” in the second, more explicitly, “the knowledge of
the Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ.”
And yet they lost that experimental knowledge of Christ
and the way of righteousness; they fell back into the same
pollutions they had escaped, and were “again entangled
therein and overcome.” They “turned from the holy com
mandment delivered to them,” so that their “latter end was
worse than their beginning.”
Therefore, those who so effectually know Christ, as by that
knowledge to have escaped the pollutions of the world, may
yet fall back into those pollutions, and perish everlastingly.
22. And this is perfectly consistent with St. Peter's words,
in the first chapter of his former Epistle: “Who are
kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation.”
Undoubtedly, so are all they who ever attain eternal salva
tion. It is the power of God only, and not our own, by
which we are kept one day or one hour.
VI. 23. Sixthly. Those who see the light of the glory of
God in the face of Jesus Christ, and who have been made
partakers of the Holy Ghost, of the witness and the fruits
of the Spirit, may nevertheless so fall from God as to perish
everlastingly.
For thus saith the inspired writer to the Hebrews: “It is
impossible for those who were once enlightened, and have
tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the
Holy Ghost,-if they fall away, to renew them again to
294 SERIOUS THOUGHTS UPON
repentance; seeing they crucify to themselves the Son of God
afresh, and put him to an open shame.” (Heb. vi. 4, 6.)
Must not every unprejudiced person see, the expressions
here used are so strong and clear, that they cannot, without
gross and palpable wresting, be understood of any but true
believers?
They “were once enlightened;” an expression familiar with
the Apostle, and never by him applied to any but believers.
So, “The God of our Lord Jesus Christ give unto you the
spirit of wisdom and revelation: The eyes of your understand
ing being enlightened, that ye may know what is the hope of
his calling, and what is the exceeding greatness of his power,
to us-ward that believe.” (Ephes. i. 17–19.) So again: “God,
who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, hath shined
into our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory
of God in the face of Jesus Christ.” (2 Cor. iv. 6.) This is a
light which no unbelievers have. They are utter strangers to
such enlightening. “The God of this world hath blinded the
minds of them which believe not, lest the light of the glorious
gospel of Christ should shine unto them.” (Verse 4.)
“They had tasted of the heavenly gift,” (emphatically so
called,) “and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost.” So
St. Peter likewise couples them together: “Be baptized for
the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy
Ghost;” (Acts ii. 38;) whereby the love of God was shed
abroad in their hearts, with all the other fruits of the Spirit.
Yea, it is remarkable, that our Lord himself in his grand
commission to St. Paul (to which the Apostle probably alludes
in these words) comprises all these three particulars. “I send
thee to open their eyes, and to turn them from darkness to
light, and from the power of Satan unto God,” (here contracted
into that one expression, “they were enlightened,”) “that
they may receive forgiveness of sins,” (“the heavenly gift,”)
“and an inheritance among them which are sanctified;”
(Acts xxvi. 18;) which are made “partakers of the Holy
Ghost,” of all the sanctifying influences of the Spirit.
The expression, “They tasted of the heavenly gift,” is
taken from the Psalmist, “Taste and see that the Lord is
good.” (Psalm xxxiv. 8.) As if he had said, Beye as assured
of his love, as of anything you see with your eyes. And let
the assurance thereof be sweet to your soul, as honey is to
your tongue.
THE PERSEVERANCE OF THE SAINTS. 295
And yet those who had been thus “enlightened,” had
“tasted” this “gift,” and been thus “partakers of the Holy
Ghost,” so “fell away” that it was “impossible to renew
them again to repentance.”
“But the Apostle only makes a supposition, “If they shall
fall away.’”
I answer: The Apostle makes no supposition at all. There
is no if in the original. The words are, ABuvalov rs; awa:
4alitéswlx;, xxi arapatsarowla; ; that is, in plain English, “It is
impossible to renew again unto repentance those who were
once enlightened” and have fallen away; therefore they must
perish everlastingly.
24. “But if so, then farewell all my comfort.”
Then your comfort depends on a poor foundation. My
comfort stands not on any opinion, either that a believer can
or cannot fall away, not on the remembrance of anything
wrought in me yesterday; but on what is to-day; on my
present knowledge of God in Christ, reconciling me to him
self; on my now beholding the light of the glory of God in
the face of Jesus Christ; walking in the light as he is in the
light, and having fellowship with the Father and with the
Son. My comfort is, that through grace I now believe in
the Lord Jesus Christ, and that his Spirit doth bear witness
with my spirit that I am a child of God. I take comfort in
this and this only, that I see Jesus at the right hand of God;
that I personally for myself, and not for another, have an
hope full of immortality; that I feel the love of God shed
abroad in my heart, being crucified to the world, and the
world crucified to me. My rejoicing is this, the testimony
of my conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not
with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, I have my
conversation in the world.
Go and find, if you can, a more solid joy, a more blissful
comfort, on this side heaven. But this comfort is not shaken,
be that opinion true or false; whether the saints in general
can or can hot fall.
If you take up with any comfort short of this, you lean on
the staff of a broken reed, which not only will not bear your
weight, but will enter into your hand and pierce you.
25. Seventhly. Those who live by faith may yet fall from
God, and perish everlastingly.
For thus saith the same inspired writer, “The just shall
296 SERIOUS THOUGHTS UPoN
live by faith; but if any man draw back, my soul shall have
no pleasure in him.” (Heb. x. 38.) “The just,” the justified
person, “shall live by faith,” even now shall he live the life
which is hid with Christ in God; and if he endure unto the
end, he shall live with God for ever. “But if any man draw
back,” saith the Lord, “my soul shall have no pleasure in
him;” that is, I will utterly cast him off; and accordingly
the drawing back here spoken of is termed, in the verse
immediately following, “drawing back to perdition.”
“But the person supposed to draw back is not the same
with him that is said to live by faith.”
I answer, (1.) Who is it then? Can any man draw back
from faith who never came to it? But,
(2.) Had the text been fairly translated, there had been
no pretence for this objection. For the original runs thus:
O Bixalog ex rissa's gnasra" was sav wrossix, rai. If o Bixalog,
“the just man that lives by faith,” (so the expression neces
sarily implies, there being no other nominative of the verb,)
“draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him.”
“But the Apostle adds: “We are not of them who draw
back unto perdition.’” And what will you infer from thence?
This is so far from contradicting what has been observed
before, that it manifestly confirms it. It is a farther proof
that there are those “who draw back unto perdition,” although
the Apostle was not of that number. Therefore those who
live by faith may yet fall from God and perish everlastingly.
26. “But does not God say to every one that lives by
faith, ‘I will never leave thee nor forsake thee?’”
The whole sentence runs thus: “Let your conversation be
without covetousness, and be content with such things as ye
have ; for he hath said, I will never leave thee nor forsake
thee.” True; provided “your conversation be without
covetousness,” and ye “be content with such things as ye
have.” Then you may “boldly say, The Lord is my helper,
and I will not fear what man shall do unto me.”
Do you not see, (1.) That this promise, as here recited,
relates wholly to temporal things? (2.) That, even thus
taken, it is not absolute, but conditional?. And, (3.) That
the condition is expressly mentioned in the very same
sentence 2
27. Eighthly. Those who are sanctified by the blood of
the covenant may so fall from God as to perish everlastingly.
THE PERSEVERANCE OF THE SAINTS. 297
For thus again saith the Apostle, “If we sin wilfully, after
we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remaineth
no more sacrifice for sin, but a certain fearful looking for
of judgment and fiery indignation, which shall devour the
adversaries. He that despised Moses’ law died without
mercy under two or three witnesses: Of how much sorer
punishment shall he be thought worthy, who hath trodden
under foot the Son of God, and hath counted the blood of
the covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing !”
(Hebrews x. 26–29.)
It is undeniably plain, (1.) That the person mentioned here
was once sanctified by the blood of the covenant. (2.) That
he afterwards, by known, wilful sin, trod under foot the Son
of God. And, (3.) That he hereby incurred a sorer punish
ment than death, namely, death everlasting.
Therefore, those who are sanctified by the blood of the
covenant may yet so fall as to perish everlastingly.
28. “What | Can the blood of Christ burn in hell? Or
can the purchase of the blood of Christ go thither?”
I answer, (1.) The blood of Christ cannot burn in hell, no
more than it can be spilled on the earth. The heavens must
contain both his flesh and blood until the restitution of all
things. But,
(2.) If the oracles of God are true, one who was
purchased by the blood of Christ may go thither. For he
that was sanctified by the blood of Christ was purchased
by the blood of Christ. But one who was sanctified by
the blood of Christ may nevertheless go to hell; may fall
under that fiery indignation which shall for ever devour the
adversaries.
29. “Can a child of God then go to hell? Or can a man
be a child of God to-day, and a child of the devil to-morrow?
If God is our Father once, is he not our Father always?”
I answer, (1.) A child of God, that is, a true believer, (for
he that believeth is born of God,) while he continues a true
believer, cannot go to hell. But, (2.) If a believer make
shipwreck of the faith, he is no longer a child of God. And
then he may go to hell, yea, and certainly will, if he continues
in unbelief. (3.) If a believer may make shipwreck of the
faith, then a man that believes now may be an unbeliever
some time hence; yea, very possibly, to-morrow; but, if so,
he who is a child of God to-day, may be a child of the devil
298 ANSWER TO LETTERS TO
to-morrow. For, (4.) God is the Father of them that believe,
so long as they believe. But the devil is the father of them
that believe not, whether they did once believe or no.
30. The sum of all is this: If the Scriptures are true, those
who are holy or righteous in the judgment of God himself;
those who are endued with the faith that purifies the heart,
that produces a good conscience; those who are grafted into
the good olive-tree, the spiritual, invisible Church; those who
are branches of the true vine, of whom Christ says, “I am
the vine, ye are the branches;” those who so effectually
know Christ, as by that knowledge to have escaped the
pollutions of the world; those who see the light of the glory
of God in the face of Jesus Christ, and who have been made
partakers of the Holy Ghost, of the witness and of the fruits
of the Spirit; those who live by faith in the Son of God;
those who are sanctified by the blood of the covenant, may
nevertheless so fall from God as to perish everlastingly.
Therefore let him that standeth take heed lest he fall.
A SUFFICIENT ANSWER
To
“LETTERS TO THE AUTHOR OF • THERON
AND ASPASIO.’”
IN A LETTER TO THE AUTHOR.
BR1stol, November 1, 1757.
SIR,
IT is not very material who you are. If Mr. Glass is
still alive, I suppose you are he. If not, you are at least one
of his humble admirers, and probably not very old: So your
youth may in some measure plead your excuse for such a
peculiar pertness, insolence, and self-sufficiency, with such
an utter contempt of all mankind, as no other writer of the
present age has shown.
As you use no ceremony toward any man, so neither shall
THE AUTHOR OF THE RON AND ASPASIO. 299
I use any toward you, but bluntly propose a few objections
to your late performance, which stare a man in the face as
soon as he looks in it.
I object, First, that you are a gross, wilful slanderer. For,
1. You say of Mr. Hervey, “He shuts up our access to the
divine righteousness, by holding forth a preliminary human
one as necessary to our enjoying the benefit of it.” (Page 4.)
Again: “You set men to work to do something, in order
to make their peace with God.” (Page 9.) This is an
absolute slander, founded on that poor pretence, that he
supposes those who repent and believe, and none but those,
to “enjoy the benefit of Christ's righteousness.” And has
he not the warrant of Christ himself for so doing,—“Repent
ye, and believe the gospel?” If this is “teaching man to
acquire a righteousness of his own,” the charge falls on our
Lord himself.
You say, 2. “As to that strange something which you call
faith, after all you have told us about it, we are at as great a
loss to tell distinctly what it is, as when you began.” (Ibid.)
This is another slander. You are at no loss (as will
presently appear) to tell what Mr. Hervey means by faith.
Whether it be right or wrong, his account of it is as clear
and distinct as any that ever was given.
You say, 3. “The popular Preachers” (so you term Arch
bishop Tillotson, Dr. Lucas, Crisp, Doddridge, Watts, Gill;
Mr. Guthrie, Boston, Erskine, Willison; Mr. Flavel, Marshal;
Mr. Griffith Jones, Hervey, Romaine, Whitefield, Wesley)
“never tell us what they mean by faith, but by some laboured
circumlocutions.” (Page 282.)
This is a third palpable slander, as your own words prove:
“They say, Faith is a real persuasion that Christ hath died
for me.” (Page 5.) Are you not here told what they mean
by faith; and that without any circumlocution at all?
You confute your own slander still farther, by adding
three more: 4. “They make a pious resolve the ground of
our acceptance with God.” (Page 360.) No, never. Not
one of the writers you have named ever did, or does so
now. 5. “The faith they talk of, is only a timid resolve,
joined with a fond conjecture.” Or, 6. “It is a fond
presumptuous wish, greatly embarrassed with doubts and
difficulties.” (Page 404.)
Slander all over. We make the righteousness and blood
"300 ANSWER TO LETTERS To
of Christ the only ground of our acceptance with God. And
the faith we talk of is neither more nor less than a divine
conviction, that Christ loved me, and gave himself for me.
You say, 7. “All who preach this doctrine are of the
world, and speak of the world; therefore the world heareth
them.” (Page 14.) “Therefore they will always be attended
by the body of the people.” (Page 37.)
A sad mistake this, in point of fact. For whether they
are of the world or no, it is certain the world, the generality
of men, (good or bad,) doth not and never did hear them.
At this day those who hear them are an exceeding small
number, in comparison of those who do not. And if the
body of the people in any place do attend some of them, how
do they attend? Just as they would a mad dog; with sticks
and stones, and whatever comes to hand.
And this you yourself account for extremely well. Sed
oportet Palaemonem esse memorem.* “What a figure would
a small number of Ministers make in the Church either of
England or Scotland, who should agree to maintain the plain,
obvious sense of their own public standards of doctrine; and
insist upon an adherence to that sense, as a term of holding
communion with them in the sacred institutions ! Their
situation in the national Church would be very uncomfortable,
as well as extremely ridiculous. For many enemies would
soon be awakened against them, to distress and misrepresent
them in various respects.” (Page 465.)
Thus much as a specimen of your veracity. I object,
Secondly, that you know not what faith is. You talk about
it, and about it, and labour and sweat, and at last come to a
most lame and impotent conclusion.
You say, “That Christ died for me, is a point not easily
settled, a point which the Scripture nowhere ascertains:”
(The very thought, and nearly the words, of Cardinal Bellar
mine, in his dispute with our forefathers:) “So far from it,
that it affirms the final perdition of many who have great
confidence of their interest in Christ;” (this only proves, that
many fancy they have what they have not; which I suppose
nobody will deny;) “yea, and declares, that “wide is the gate,
and broad is the way, that leadeth to destruction.” (Page 14.)
It is so; but this is nothing to the point,-the nature of true
faith.
*But Palaemon ought to possess a good memory.–EDIT.
rHE AUTHOR OF THERON AND ASPASIO. 301
“Nature, these men say, begins the work;” (I know none
of them who say so;) “and then grace helps out the efforts
of nature, and persuades a man, though he be not mentioned
in Scripture, either by name or surname, that Christ died for
him.” (Page 33.) “So the Spirit whispers something to the
heart of a sinner, beside what he publicly speaks in the
Scriptures. But will any lover of the Scriptures allow the
possibility of this,—that the Spirit should ever speak a syllable
to any man, beside what he publicly speaks there?” (Page
35.) You will presently allow something wonderfully like it.
And you suppose yourself to be a “lover of the Scriptures.”
“Some of the Martyrs were assured of being the friends
of Christ.” (Page 398.) How? Which way? Neither their
name nor surname was mentioned in Scripture ! Why, “the
Holy Ghost assured their hearts and the hearts of the first
Christians, that their joy was not the joy of the hypocrite, but
the beginning of eternal life. Thus their joy was made full,
and their love perfected by the highest enjoyments it was
here capable of Every believer finds a refreshment to his
mind, far superior to all the comforts of this life. They
stand in God’s presence, and have their joy made full in
beholding the light of his countenance.” (Page 402.)
Allow this, and we will never dispute, whether the Spirit
does or does not “whisper anything to their hearts.” It is
enough, that they have “the Spirit of adoption, crying in
their hearts, Abba, Father;” and that this “Spirit witnesseth
with their spirits that they are the children of God.”
“The chief time of this agency of the Spirit is, while the
Preachers are declaiming. And the people are in continual
expectation of the season of power in hearing them.”
(Page 38.)
Yea, and reason good, if, as you affirm, “hearing is the
only mean whereby God gives faith.” (Page 391.) But we
do not affirm so much. We only maintain, that “faith”
generally “cometh by hearing.”
But you go on : “They who partake of Christ's Joy, receive
the highest evidence that he is the Christ. Thus then faith
is greatly confirmed by a kind of presence of its object.
Their love is joyfully inflamed, and they obtain the assurance
of hope, by having in themselves an experimental foretaste
of their eternal enjoyment.” (Page 415.)
Why, then, what are we disputing about, seeing you are
302 ANSWER TO LETTERS To
now so kind as to allow, not only the possibility, but the real
existence, of all that we contend for?
“O, but this is not faith. Faith is quite another thing.”
What is it? Let us hear your account of it.
“The essence of true faith is the eternal God.” (Page 288.)
“What is faith? It is the blood of Christ.” (Page 330.)
Stark, staring nonsense ! Sir, you can talk sense, if you
please. Why should you palm upon your readers such stuff
as this?
Very little better than this is your third definition: “The
truth which a man believes is his faith.” (Page 301.) No,
it is not; no more than the light which a man sees is his sight.
You must therefore guess again. “To believe this fact, Christ
rose from the dead, is faith.” (Page 169.) “Ask a man, Is
the gospel true or not? If he holds it to be true, this is faith.”
(Page 296.) But is this saving faith? “Yes. Every one
that believes the gospel history shall be saved.” (Page 333.)
This is flat and plain. And, if it is but true, every devil in
hell will be saved. For it is absolutely certain, every one of
these believes this fact, —Christ rose from the dead. It is
certain, every one of these believes the Gospel history.
Therefore this is not saving faith: Neither will every one be
saved who believes this fact, —Christ rose from the dead. It
follows, that, whatever others do, you know not what faith is.
I object, Thirdly, 1. That you yourself “shut up our
access to the divine righteousness.” 2. That you vehemently
contradict yourself, and do the very thing which you charge
upon others.
1. You yourself shut up our access to the divine righteous
ness by destroying that repentance which Christ has made
the way to it. “Ask men,” you say, “have they sinned or
not ? If they know they have, this is conviction. And this
is preparation enough for mercy.” Soft casuistry indeed !
He that receives this saying, is never likely either to
“repent” or “believe the gospel.” And if he do not, he
can have no access to the righteousness of Christ.
Yet you strangely affirm, “A careless sinner is in full as
hopeful a way as one that is the most deeply convicted.”
(Page 292.) How can this be, if that conviction be from
God? Where He has begun the work, will He not finish
it? Have we not reason to hope this? But in a careless
sinner that work is not begun; perhaps, never will be.
ThE AUTHOR OF THERON AND ASPASIO. 303
Again: Whereas our Lord gives a general command, “Seek,
and ye shall find;” you say, “Saving faith was never yet
sought, or in the remotest manner wished for, by an unbe
liever:” (Page 372 :) A proposition as contrary to the whole
tenor of Scripture, as to the experience of every true believer.
Every one who now believes, knows how he sought and wished
for that faith, before he experienced it. It is not true even
with regard to your faith, a belief of the Bible. For I know
Deists at this day, who have often wished they could believe
the Bible, and owned, “it was happy for them that could.”
2. You vehemently contradict yourself, and do the very
thing which you charge upon others.
“If we imagine we possess or desire to attain any requisite to
our acceptance with God, beside or in connexion with the bare
work of Christ, Christ shall profit us nothing.” (Page 96.)
Again: “What is required of us in order to our acceptance
with God? Nothing. The least attempt to do anything is
damnably criminal.”
Very good. Now for self-consistency: “What Christ has
done is that which quiets the conscience of man as soon as
he knows it. So that he need ask no more than, ‘Is it true
or not?” If he finds it true, he is happy. If he does not,
he can reap no comfort from it. Our comfort arises from the
persuasion of this.” (Page 12.)
Again: “Men are justified by a knowledge of the righte
ousness of Christ.” (Page 406.) And yet again:
“The sole requisite to acceptance is, divine righteousness
brought to view.” (Page 291.)
So you have brought matters to a fine conclusion; confut
ing an hundred of your own assertions, and doing the very
thing for which you have been all along so unmercifully con
demning others. You yourself here teach another “requisite
to our acceptance, beside the bare work of Christ,” viz., the
knowing that work, the finding it true. Therefore, by your
own word, “Christ shall profit you nothing.” In one page
you say, “Nothing is required in order to our acceptance
with God;” in another, “Divine righteousness brought to
view is requisite to our acceptance.” Brought to view /
What self-righteousness is this? Which of “the popular
Preachers” could have done worse? “Men are justified by
a knowledge of the righteousness of Christ.” Knowledge /
What ! our own knowledge ! Knowledge in us! Why, this
304 ANSWER TO LETTERS To
is the very thing which we call faith. So you have fairly
given up the whole question, justified your opponents, and
condemned yourself as “damnably criminal !”
I object, Fourthly, that you have no charity, and that you
know not what charity is. That you know not what it is,
manifestly appears from the wonderful definition you give of
it. “Charity,” you say, “is fellowship with God in his
blessedness.” (Page 453.) Muddy, confused, ut nihil supra /*
We know, he that loveth hath fellowship with God. But
yet the ideas of one and of the other are widely different.
We know, “God is love; and he that dwelleth in love,
dwelleth in God, and God in him.” But yet loving him is
not the same thing with dwelling in him. If it were, the
whole sentence would be flat tautology.
You say, 2. Charity is “the love of the truth.” (Page 456.)
Not at all: No more than it is the love of the sun. It is
the love of God, and of man for God’s sake: No more and
no less.
You say, 3. “Christ is known to us only by report.”
That is not granted. “And charity is the love of that
report.” (Page 455.) Every intelligent reader will want no
farther proof, that you know not what charity is.
No wonder then that you have it not; nay, that you are at
the utmost distance, both from the love of God and of your
neighbour. You cannot love God, because you do not love
your neighbour. For he that loves God, loves his brother
also. But such hatred, malevolence, rancour, bitterness, as
you show to all who do not exactly fall in with your opinion,
was scarce ever seen in a Jew, an Heathen, or a Popish
inquisitor.-
“Nay, but you abhor persecution. You would persecute
no man.” I should be very loath to trust you. I doubt,
were it in your power, you would make more bonfires in
Smithfield than Bonner and Gardiner put together. But if
not, if you would not persecute with fire and faggot,
Mirum "
Ut neque calce lupus quenquam, neque dente petit bos : +
What does this prove? Only that you murder in another way.
* So as nothing can exceed it.–EDIT.
+ The following is Francis's translation of this quotation from Horace :
“Wondrous indeed! that bulls ne'er strive to bite,
Nor wolves with desperate horns engage in fight.”—EDIT.
THE AUTHOR OF THERON AND ASPASIO. 305
You smite with the tongue; with the poison of asps, which is
under your lips.
A few specimens follow:—
“The popular Preachers worship another God.” (Page 338.)
“It can never be allowed that Dr. Doddridge worshipped the
same God with Paul.” (Page 470.) “Notice the difference
betwixt the God of these Preachers, and the true God;
betwixt their Christ, and the Christ preached by the Apostles;
betwixt their spirit, and the Spirit that influenced the
Apostles.” (Page 40.)
“I know no sinners more hardened, none greater destroyers
of mankind, than they.” (Page 98.) “By no small energy of
deceit, they darken the revelation of God, and change the doc
trine of the blessed God into a doctrine of self-dependence.”
Strange, that you yourself should do the very same thing!
averring, that “men are justified by a knowledge of the
righteousness of Christ,” not by the bare work which Christ
has wrought! You put me in mind of an old usurer, who
vehemently thanked a Minister that had preached a severe
sermon against usury; and being asked, “Why do you talk
thus?” replied, “I wish there were no usurer in London
beside myself!” Sir, do not you wish there was no Minister
in Great Britain who taught this doctrine, beside yourself?
“That any who has learnt his religion from the New
Testament, should mistake their doctrine for the Christian,
is astonishing.” (Page 40.) Theirs, or yours? for it happens
to be one and the same with regard to the present point.
“By many deceits they change the truth of God into a
lie.” (Ibid.) If they do, so do you. Indeed you heavily
complain of the imputation. You say, “It is both astonish
ing and provoking, that, after all, men will say, there is no
difference between their scheme and yours.” And yet, after
all, so it is: Truth is great, and will prevail. In the leading
point, that of justification, both you and they teach, “Men
are justified by a knowledge of the righteousness of Christ.”
Only they think, it is a divine, supernatural, experimental
knowledge, wrought in the inmost soul; and you think, it is
a bare historical knowledge, of the same kind with that which
the devils have.
One specimen more of your unparalleled charity, which in
any but yourself would be astonishing: “If any one chooses
to go to hell by a devout path, let him study any one of those
WOL. X. X
306 LETTER. To
four famous treatises: Mr. Guthrie’s ‘Trial of a Saving Interest
in Christ; Mr. Marshal’s ‘Gospel Mystery of Sanctification;’
Mr. Boston’s ‘Human Nature in its Fourfold State;’ or Dr.
Doddridge’s ‘Rise and Progress of Religion in the Soul.”
If any profane person, who desires to be converted, enter into
the spirit of those books, he thereby becomes twofold more a
child of hell than he was before.” (Page 436.)
Such is the doctrine, such is the spirit, of Palaemon |
condemning the whole generation of God’s children; sending
all his opponents to hell at once; casting arrows, firebrands,
death on every side ! But I stop. God be merciful to thee
a sinner; and show thee compassion, though thou hast none
for thy fellow-servants | Otherwise it will be more tolerable,
I will not say for Seneca or Epictetus, but for Nero or
Domitian, in the day of judgment, than for thee! W
A L E T T E R.
To
A GENTLEMAN AT BRISTOL.
BRIsTol, January 6, 1758.
SLR,
YoU desire my thoughts on a paper lately addressed to
the inhabitants of St. Stephen’s parish, and an answer
thereto, entitled, “A Seasonable Antidote against Popery.”
I have at present little leisure, and cannot speak so fully as
the importance of the subject requires. I can only just tell
you wherein I do or do not agree with what is advanced in
the one or the other.
I agree with the main of what is asserted in that paper,
allowing for some expressions which I could wish had been
altered, because some of them are a little obscure, others
liable to misinterpretation; indeed, so liable, that they could
A GENTLEMAN AT BRISTOL. 307
scarce fail to be misunderstood by the unwary, and censured
by the unfriendly, reader.
But I cannot agree, that “obedience is a condition of, or
antecedent to, justification,” unless we mean final justifi
cation. This I apprehend to be a considerable mistake;
although, indeed, it is not explicitly asserted, but only implied
in some parts of that address.
I entirely agree with the author of the “Seasonable Anti
dote,” in the important points that follow:—
“That a sinner is justified or accounted righteous before
God, only through the righteousness” (or merits) “of Jesus
Christ; that the end of his living and dying for us was, that
our persons first, and then our works, might be accepted;
that faith is the hand which apprehends, the instrument
which applies, the merits of Christ for our justification; that
justifying faith is the gift of the Holy Spirit; that He evidences
our being justified, by bearing his testimony with our spirits,
that we are the children of God, and by enabling us to bring
forth, first the inward, and then the outward, fruits of the
Spirit; and, lastly, that these fruits do not justify us, do not
procure our justification, but prove us to be justified; as the
fruits on a tree do not make it alive, but prove it to be alive.”
(Pages 33, 34.)
These undoubtedly are the genuine principles of the Church
of England. And they are confirmed, as by our Liturgy,
Articles, and Homilies, so by the whole tenor of Scripture.
Therefore, till heaven and earth pass away, these truths will
not pass away.
But I do not agree with the author of that tract, in the
spirit of the whole performance. It does not seem to breathe
either that modesty, or seriousness, or charity, which one
would desire. One would not desire to hear any private
person, of no great note in the Church or the world, speak, as
it were, ex cathedrá, with an air of infallibility, or at least
of vast self-sufficiency, on a point wherein men of eminence,
both for piety, learning, and office, have been so greatly
divided. Though my judgment is nothing altered, yet I often
condemn myself for my past manner of speaking on this head.
Again: I do not rejoice at observing any thing light or
ludicrous in an answer to so serious a paper; and much less
in finding any man branded as a Papist, because his doctrine
in one particular instance resembles (for that is the utmost
X 2
308 LETTER. To
which can be proved) a doctrine of the Church of Rome. I
can in no wise reconcile this to the grand rule of charity,—
Doing to others as we would they should do to us.
Indeed, it is said, “Dr. T. openly defends the fundamental
doctrine of Popery, justification by works.” (Page 3.) There
fore, “he must be a Papist.” (Page 4.) But here is a double
mistake: For, 1. Whatever may be implied in some of his
expressions, it is most certain Dr. T. does not openly defend
justification by works. 2. This itself, justification by works,
is not the fundamental doctrine of Popery, but the universality
of the Romish Church, and the supremacy of the Bishop of
Rome. And to call any one a Papist who denies these, is
neither charity nor justice.
I do not agree with the author in what follows: Dr. T.
“loses sight of the truth, when he talks of Christ’s having
obtained for us a covenant of better hopes; and that faith
and repentance are the terms of this covenant. They are
not. They are the free gifts of the covenant of grace, not the
terms or conditions. To say, ‘Privileges of the covenant art
the terms or conditions of it,” is downright Popery.”
This is downright calling names, and no better. But it
falls on a greater than Dr. T. St. Paul affirms, Jesus Christ
is the Mediator of a better covenant, established upon better
promises; yea, and that better covenant he hath obtained for
us, by his own blood. And if any desire to receive the
privileges which are freely given according to the tenor of
this covenant, Jesus Christ himself has marked out the way,—
“Repent, and believe the gospel.” These, therefore, are the
terms of the covenant, unless the author of it was mistaken.
These are the conditions of it; unless a man can enter into
the kingdom, without either repenting or believing. For the
word condition means neither more nor less than something
sine quá non; without which something else is not done.
Now, this is the exact truth with regard to repenting and
believing; without which God does not work in us “righteous
ness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost.”
It is true, repentance and faith are privileges and free
gifts. But this does not hinder their being conditions too.
And neither Mr. Calvin himself, nor any of our Reformers,
made any scruple of calling them so.
“But the gospel is a revelation of grace and mercy, not a
proposal of a covenant of terms and conditions.” (Page 5.)
A GENTLEMAN AT BRISTOL. 309
t is both. It is a revelation of grace and mercy, to all that
“repent and believe.” And this the author himself owns in
the following page: “The free grace of God applies to
sinners the benefits of Christ’s atonement and righteousness,
by working in them repentance and faith.” (Page 6.) Then
they are not applied without repentance and faith; that is,
in plain terms, thèse are the conditions of that application.
I read in the next page: “In the gospel we have the free
promises of eternal life, but not annexed to faith and repentance,
as works of man,” (true; they are the gift of God,) “or the
terms or conditions of the covenant.” Yes, certainly; they are
no less terms or conditions, although God works them in us.
“But what is promised us as a free gift, cannot be received
upon the performance of any terms or conditions.” Indeed
it can. Our Lord said to the man born blind, “Go and
wash in the pool of Siloam.” Here was a plain condition to
be performed; something without which he would not have
received his sight. And yet his sight was a gift altogether
as free, as if the pool had never been mentioned.
“But if repentance and faith are the free gifts of God, can
they be the terms or conditions of our justification?” (Page
9.) Yes: Why not? They are still something without
which no man is or can be justified.
“Can then God give that freely, which he does not give
but upon certain terms and conditions?” (Ibid.) Doubtless
he can; as one may freely give you a sum of money, on
condition you stretch out your hand to receive it. It is
therefore no “contradiction to say, We are justified freely by
grace, and yet upon certain terms or conditions.” (Page 10.)
I cannot therefore agree, that “we are accepted without
any terms previously performed to qualify us for acceptance.”
For we are not accepted, nor are we qualified for, or capable
of, acceptance, without repentance and faith.
“But a man is not justified by works, but by the faith of
Christ. This excludes all qualifications.” (Page 13.) Surely
it does not exclude the qualification of faith !
“But St. Paul asserts, ‘To him that worketh not, but
believeth on him that justifieth the ungodly, his faith is
counted to him for righteousness.’”
True: “To him that worketh not.” But does God justify
him that “believeth not?” Otherwise, this text proves just
the contrary to what it is brought to prove.
310 LETTER. To
But “our Church excludes repentance and faith from
deserving any part of our justification. Why then do you
insist upon them as qualifications requisite to our justifica
tion?” (Page 19.)
Because Christ and his Apostles do so. Yet we all agree,
they do not deserve any part of our justification. They are
no part of the meritorious cause; but they are the conditions
of it. This and no other is “the doctrine of Scripture, and
of the Church of England l’” Both the Scripture and “our
Church allow, yea, insist on these qualifications or condi
tions.” (Page 21.)
“But if repentance and faith would not be valid and
acceptable without the righteousness of Christ, then they
cannot be necessary qualifications for our justification.”
(Page 22.) I cannot allow the consequence. They are not
acceptable without the righteousness or merits of Christ;
and yet he himself has made them necessary qualifications
for our justification through his merits.
But the grand objection of this gentleman lies against the
Doctor’s next paragraph; the sum of which is: “The merits
of Christ were never intended to supersede the necessity of
repentance and obedience,” (I would say, repentance and
faith,) “but to make them acceptable in the sight of God,
and to purchase for them” (I would add, that obey him) “a
reward of immortal happiness.”
I am not afraid to undertake the defence of this paragraph,
with this small variation, against Mr. Chapman, Mr. Nyberg,
Count Zinzendorf, or any other person whatever; provided
only that he will set his name to his work; for I do not love
fighting in the dark.
And I, as well as Dr. T., affirm, that “to say more than
this concerning Christ’s imputed merits,” to say more than,
that “they have purchased for us grace to repent and believe,
acceptance upon our believing, power to obey, and eternal
salvation to them that do obey him;”—to say more than this
“is blasphemous Antinomianism,” such as Mr. Calvin would
have abhorred; and does “open a door to all manner of sin
and wickedness.”
“I must likewise affirm, that to talk of imputed righteous
ness in the manner many do at this day, is making the
imaginary transfer of Christ's righteousness serve as a cover
for the unrighteousness of mankind.” (Page 26.) Does not
A GENTLEMAN AT BRISTOL. 311
Mr. Ch-p-n do this at Bristol? Does not Mr. M-rd—n,
at London? Let them shudder then, let their blood run
cold, who do it; not theirs who tell them that they do so.
It is not the latter, but the former, who “trample Christ’s
righteousness under foot as a mean and vile thing.”
I firmly believe, “We are accounted righteous before God,
justified only for the merit of Christ.” But let us have no
shifting the terms: “Only through Christ's imputed righte
ousness,” are not the words of the Article, neither the
language of our Church. Much less does our Church any
where affirm, “that the righteousness of Christ is imputed to
the ungodly, who have no qualifications;” (page 28;) no
repentance, no faith; nor do the Scriptures ever affirm this.
The reflection on the general inference, I so entirely agree
with, as to think it worth transcribing: “If you have faith
and repentance, you want no other signs or evidences of your
justification. But if you have not these, to pretend to any
other assurances, tokens, feelings, or experiences, is vain and
delusive.” Does he know any one who maintains, that a
man may be in a state of justification, and yet have no faith
or repentance? But the marks and evidences of true faith
which the Scripture has promised, must not be discarded as
vain or delusive. The Scripture has promised us the assur
ance of faith, to be wrought in us by the operation of God.
It mentions “the earnest of the Spirit,” and speaks of
“feeling after the Lord,” and finding him; and so our
Church, in her Seventeenth Article, speaks of “feeling in
ourselves the working of the Spirit of Christ;” and, in the
Homily for Rogation Week, of “feeling our conscience at
peace with God, through remission of our sin.” So that we
must not reject all “assurances, tokens, feelings, and
experiences,” as “vain and delusive.”
Nor do I apprehend Dr. T. ever intended to say, that we
must reject all inward feelings, but only those which are
without faith or repentance. And who would not reject.
these ? His very words are, “If you have not these, to
pretend to any other feelings is vain and delusive.” I say
so too. Meantime, he is undoubtedly sensible, that there is
a “consolation in love;” a “peace that passeth all under
standing,” and a “joy that is unspeakable and full of glory.”
Nor can we imagine him to deny, that these must be felt,
inwardly felt, wherever they exist.
312 THOUGHTS ON
Upon the whole, I cannot but observe, how extremely
difficult it is, even for men who have an upright intention,
and are not wanting either in natural or acquired abilities,
to understand one another: And how hard it is to do even
justice to those whom we do not throughly understand;
much more to treat them with that gentleness, tenderness,
and brotherly kindness, with which, upon a change of
circumstances, we might reasonably desire to be treated
ourselves. O when shall men know whose disciples we are,
by our “loving one another, as He hath loved us!” The
God of love hasten the time !
I am,
Dear Sir,
Your affectionate servant,
JOHN WESLEY.
THOUGHTS
oN
THE IMPUTED RIGHTEOUSNESS OF CHRIST.
1. A TRACT has lately been published in my name, con
cerning the imputed righteousness of Christ. This calls me
to explain myself upon that head; which I will do with all
the clearness I can. But I quarrel with no man for thinking
or speaking otherwise than I do: I blame none for using
those expressions which he believes to be scriptural. If he
quarrels with me for not using them, at least not so
frequently as himself, I can only pity him, and wish him
more of “the mind which was in Christ.”
2. “The righteousness of Christ” is an expression which I
do not find in the Bible. “The righteousness of God” is an
expression which I do find there. I believe this means,
First, the mercy of God; as 2 Peter i. 1 : “Them that have
obtained like precious faith with us, through the righteous
ness of God.” How does it appear that “the righteousness
CHRIST's 1MPUTED RIGHTEoUsNEss. 313
of God” here, means either more or less than his mercy?
“My mouth shall show forth thy righteousness and thy
salvation;” thy mercy in delivering me. “I will make
mention of thy righteousness only. Thy righteousness, O
God, is very high.” (Psalm lxxi. 15, &c.) Here the “righte
ousness of God” is expressly mentioned; but I will not take
upon me to say, that it means the righteousness or mercy of
the Son, any more than of the Holy Ghost.
3. I believe this expression means, Secondly, God’s method
of justifying sinners. So Rom. i. 17: “I am not ashamed
of the gospel of Christ; for therein is the righteousness of
God,” his way of justifying sinners, “revealed.” “Now the
righteousness of God is manifested; even the righteousness
of God which is by faith;” (unless righteousness here also
means mercy;) “Jesus Christ, whom God hath set forth to
be a propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his
righteousness for the remission of the sins that are past; that
he might be just, and yet the justifier of him that believeth
in Jesus.” (iii. 21, &c.) “They being ignorant of God’s
righteousness,” (method of justifying sinners,) “and going
about to establish their own righteousness,” (a method of
their own opposite to his,) “have not submitted themselves
unto the righteousness of God.” (x. 3.)
4. Perhaps it has a peculiar meaning in 2 Cor. v. 21:
“He made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin; that we
might be made the righteousness of God in ” (or through)
“him;” that we might be justified and sanctified, might
receive the whole blessing of God, through him.
5. And is not this the natural meaning of Phil. iii. 8, 9:
“That I may win Christ, and be found in him,” grafted into
the true vine, “not having my own righteousness,”—the method
of justification which I so long chose for myself, “which is of
the law; but the righteousness which is of God”—the
method of justification which God hath chosen—“by faith?’”
6. “But is not Christ termed “our righteousness?’” He
is: “This is the name whereby he shall be called, The Lord
our Righteousness.” (Jer. xxiii. 6.) And is not the plain,
indisputable meaning of this scripture, He shall be what he
is called, the sole Purchaser, the sole meritorious Cause, both
of our justification and sanctification?
7. Nearly related to this is the following text: “Jesus
Christ is made of God unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and
314 Thou GHTS ON
sanctification, and redemption.” (1 Cor. i. 30.) And what
does this prove, but that he is made unto us righteousness,
or justification, just as he is made unto us sanctification?
In what sense? He is the sole Author of one, as well as of
the other, the Author of our whole salvation.
8. There seems to be something more implied in Romans
x. 3. Does it not imply thus much “Christ is the end of
the law”—not only of the Mosaic dispensation, but of the
law of works, which was given to Adam in his original per
fection—“for righteousness to every one that believeth;”
to the end that “every one who believeth” in him, though
he have not kept, and cannot keep, that law, may be both
accounted and made righteous.
9. Accordingly, frequent mention is made, in Scripture, of
“faith counted for righteousness.” So Genesis xv. 6: “He”
(Abraham) “believed in the Lord, and he counted it to him
for righteousness:” A text repeated, with but little variation,
over and over in the New Testament: “To him that worketh
not, but believeth on him who justifieth the ungodly, his
faith is counted for righteousness.” (Rom. iv. 5.) Thus it
was that “Noah became heir of the righteousness,” the
justification, “which is by faith.” (Heb. xi. 7.) Thus also
“the Gentiles,” when the Jews fell short, “attained to
righteousness, even the righteousness which is by faith.”
(Rom. ix. 30.) But that expression, “the righteousness of
Christ,” does not occur in any of these texts.
10. It seems, righteousness in the following texts means
neither more nor less than justification: “If righteousness
come by the law, then Christ is dead in vain.” (Gal. ii. 21.)
“If there had been a law which could have given life,” spiritual
life, or a title to life eternal, “then righteousness should have
been by the law;” (iii. 21;) though some may think it here
includes sanctification also; which it appears to do, Rev.
xix. 8: “The fine linen is the righteousness of the saints.”
11. “But when St. Paul says, (Rom. v. 18) ‘By the righte
ousness of one,’ (called in the following verse, ‘the obedience
of one, even his “obedience unto death, his dying for us,)
‘the free gift came, does he not mean the righteousness of
Christ?” Undoubtedly he does. But this is not the question.
We are not inquiring what he means, but what he says. We
are all agreed as to the meaning, but not as to the expression,
“the imputing the righteousness of Christ,” which I still say,
cHRIST's IMPUTED RIGHTEoUsNEss. 315
I dare not insist upon, neither require any one to use, because
I cannot find it in the Bible. If any one can, he has better
eyes than me; and I wish he would show me where it is.
12. Now, if by “the righteousness of Christ” we mean
anything which the Scripture does not mean, it is certain we
put darkness for light. If we mean the same which the
Scripture means by different expressions, why do we prefer
this expression to the scriptural? Is not this correcting the
wisdom of the Holy Ghost, and opposing our own to the
perfect knowledge of God?
13. I am myself the more sparing in the use of it, because
it has been so frequently and so dreadfully abused; and
because the Antinomians use it at this day to justify the
grossest abominations. And it is great pity that those who
love, who preach, and follow after, holiness, should, under
the notion of honouring Christ, give any countenance to
those who continually make him “the minister of sin,” and
so build on his righteousness as to live in such ungodliness
and unrighteousness as is scarce named even among the
Heathens.
14. And doth not this way of speaking naturally tend to
make Christ the minister of sin? For if the very personal
obedience of Christ (as those expressions directly lead me to
think) be mine the moment I believe, can anything be added
thereto? Does my obeying God add any value to the perfect
obedience of Christ? On this scheme, then, are not the
holy and unholy on the very same footing?
15. Upon the whole, I cannot express my thoughts better
than in the words of that good man, Mr. Hervey: “If people
may be safe and their inheritance secure without any know
ledge of these particularities, why should you offer to puzzle
their heads with a few unnecessary terms? We are not very
solicitous as to the credit or the use of any particular set of
phrases. Only let men be humbled as repenting criminals
at the Redeemer's feet; let them rely as devoted pensioners
on his precious merits; and they are undoubtedly in the way
to a blissful immortality.” (Dialogues, vol. i., p. 43. Dublin
edition.)
DUBLIN, April 5, 1762.
PREFACE
To
A TREATISE ON JUSTIFICATION,
EXTRACTED FROM MR. JOIIN GOODWIN.
whEREIN ALL THAT 1s PERson AL, IN LETTERs JUST TURL1s HEn,
UNDER THE NAME of THE REv. MR. HERVEY, 1s ANswen ED.
1. PERHAPs I should not have submitted, at least not so
soon, to the importunity of my friends, who have long been
soliciting me to abridge and publish the ensuing treatise, had
not some warm people published a tract, entitled, “The Scrip
ture Doctrine of Imputed Righteousness Defended.” I then
judged it absolutely incumbent upon me to publish the real
Scripture doctrine. And this I believed I could not either
draw up or defend better than I found it done to my hands by
one who, at the time he wrote this book, was a firm and zealous
Calvinist. This enabled him to confirm what he advanced by
such authorities, as well from Calvin himself, as from his
most eminent followers, as I could not have done, nor any
who had not been long and critically versed in their writings.
2. A greater difficulty was, to know what notice I ought to
take of Mr. Hervey’s treatise, wrote, as the Leeds publisher
says, with a “becoming and well-tempered tartness.” The
case was peculiar. My acquaintance with Mr. Hervey com
menced about thirty years ago, when I was a Fellow, and he
was a Commoner, of Lincoln College in Oxford. At my
request he was permitted, as was Mr. Whitefield some time
after, to make one of a little company who used to spend the
evenings together, in reading the Holy Scriptures. And I
rejoiced in having many opportunities of assisting him both
in his studies and in his Christian warfare; which he
acknowledged in very strong terms, by a letter now in my
hands, wrote not long after the publication of his “Medita
tions among the Tombs.” In my answer to this, I told him
frankly, there were one or two passages in that book, which,
if I had seen before it was printed, I should have advised
PREFACE TO A TREATISE ON JUSTIFICATION. 317
him not to insert. He replied, if he printed anything more,
he would beg of me to correct it first. Accordingly, he sent
me, not long after, the manuscript of his three first Dialogues.
I sent them back after some days, with a few inconsiderable
corrections; but upon his complaining, “You are not my
friend, if you do not take more liberty with me,” I promised I
would; so he sent them again, and I made some more important
alterations. I was not surprised at seeing no more of the copy,
till I saw it in print. When I had read it, I wrote him my
thoughts freely, but received no answer. On October 15, 1756,
I sent him a second letter, which I here insert, that every
impartial person may understand the real merits of the cause.
I need only premise, that, at the time I wrote, I had not the
least thought of making it public. I only spoke my private
thoughts in a free, open manner, to a friend dear as a
brother,-I had almost said to a pupil,—to a son; for so
near I still accounted him. It is no wonder therefore, that
“several of my objections,” as Mr. Hervey himself observes,
“appear more like notes and memorandums, tl an a just plea
to the public.” (Page 80.) It is true. They appear like
what they are, like what they were originally intended for.
I had no thought of a plea to the public when I wrote, but of
“notes and memorandums to a private man.”
DEAR SIR, October 15, 1756.
A consider ABLE time since, I sent you a few hasty
thoughts which occurred to me on reading the “Dialogues
between Theron and Aspasio.” I have not been favoured
with any answer. Yet upon another and a more careful
perusal of them, I could not but set down some obvious
reflections, which I would rather have communicated before
these Dialogues were published.
In the First Dialogue there are several just and strong
observations, which may be of use to every scrious reader.
In the Second, is not the description often too laboured?
the language too stiff and affected? Yet the reflections on
the creation, in the thirty-first and following pages, make
abundant amends for this. (I cite the pages according to
the Dublin edition, having wrote the rough draught of what
follows in Ireland.)
Is justification more or less than God’s pardoning and
accepting a sinner through the merits of Christ? That God
318 PREFACE TO
herein “reckons the righteousness and obedience which
Christ performed as our own,” (page 39,) I allow; if by that
ambiguous expression you mean only, as you here explain it
yourself, “They are as effectual for obtaining our salvation,
as if they were our own personal qualifications.” (Page 41.)
“We are not solicitous as to any particular set of phrases.
Only let men be humbled, as repenting criminals at Christ's
feet, let them rely as devoted pensioners on his merits,
and they are undoubtedly in the way to a blissful immor
tality.” (Page 43.) Then, for Christ's sake, and for the sake
of the immortal souls which he has purchased with his blood,
do not dispute for that particular phrase, “the imputed
righteousness of Christ.” It is not scriptural; it is not
necessary. Men who scruple to use, men who never heard,
the expression, may yet “be humbled, as repenting criminals
at his feet, and rely as devoted pensioners on his merits.”
But it has done immense hurt. I have had abundant proof,
that the frequent use of this unnecessary phrase, instead of
“furthering men's progress in vital holiness,” has made
them satisfied without any holiness at all; yea, and encou
raged them to work all uncleanness with greediness.
“To ascribe pardon to Christ's passive, eternal life to his
active, righteousness, is fanciful rather than judicious. His
universal obedience from his birth to his death is the one
foundation of my hope.” (Page 45.)
This is unquestionably right. But if it be, there is no
manner of need to make the imputation of his active righteous
ness a separate and laboured head of discourse. O that you
had been content with this plain scriptural account, and
spared some of the dialogues and letters that follow !
The Third and Fourth Dialogues contain an admirable
illustration and confirmation of the great doctrine of Christ's
satisfaction. Yet even here I observe a few passages which
are liable to some exception:
“Satisfaction was made to the divine law.” (Page 54.) I
do not remember any such expression in Scripture. This
way of speaking of the law, as a person injured and to be
satisfied, seems hardly defensible.
“The death of Christ procured the pardon and acceptance
of believers, even before he came in the flesh.” (Page 74.)
Yea, and ever since. In this we all agree. And why should
we contend for anything more?
A TREATISE ON JUSTIFICATION. 319
“All the benefits of the new covenant are the purchase of
his blood.” (Page 120.) Surely they are. And after this
has been fully proved, where is the need, where is the use,
of contending so strenuously for the imputation of his
righteousness, as is done in the Fifth and Sixth Dialogues?
“If he was our substitute as to penal sufferings, why not
as to justifying obedience?” (Page 135.)
The former is expressly asserted in Scripture. The latter
is not expressly asserted there.
“As sin and misery have abounded through the first
Adam, mercy and grace have much more abounded through
the Second. So that none can have any reason to complain.”
(Page 145.) No, not if the second Adam died for all. Other
wise, all for whom he did not die have great reason to
complain. For they inevitably fall by the first Adam, without
any help from the Second.
“The whole world of believers” (page 148) is an expres
sion which never occurs in Scripture, nor has it any coun
tenance there: The world, in the inspired writings, being
constantly taken either in the universal or in a bad sense;
either for the whole of mankind, or for that part of them who
know not God.
“‘In the Lord shall all the house of Israel be justified.’”
(Page 149.) It ought unquestionably to be rendered, “By
or through the Lord:” This argument therefore proves
nothing. “Ye are complete in him.” The words literally
rendered are, “Ye are filled with him.” And the whole
passage, as any unprejudiced reader may observe, relates to
sanctification, not justification.
“They are accepted for Christ's sake; this is justification
through imputed righteousness.” (Page 150.) That remains to
be proved. Many allow the former, who cannot allow the latter.
“The righteousness which justifies us is already wrought
out.” (Page 151.)—A crude, unscriptural expression “It
was set on foot, carried on, completed.”—O vain philosophy
The plain truth is, Christ lived and “tasted death for every
man.” And through the merits of his life and death, every
believer is justified.
“Whoever perverts so glorious a doctrine shows he never
believed.” (Page 152.) Not so. They who “turn back as
a dog to the vomit” had once “escaped the pollutions of the
world by the knowledge of Christ.”
320 PREFACE. To
“The goodness of God leadeth to repentance.” (Page 153.)
This is unquestionably true. But the nice, metaphysical
doctrine of imputed righteousness leads not to repentance,
but to licentiousness.
“The believer cannot but add to his faith works of righteous
ness.” (Page 154.) During his first love, this is often true.
But it is not true afterwards, as we know and feel by melan
choly experience.
“We no longer obey in order to lay the foundation of
our final acceptance.” (Page 155.) No.: That foundation is
already laid in the merits of Christ. Yet we obey in order
to our final acceptance through his merits. And in this
sense, by obeying, we “lay a good foundation, that we may
attain eternal life.”
“‘We establish the law:” We provide for its honour, by the
perfect obedience of Christ.” (Page 156.) Can you possibly
think St. Paul meant this? that such a thought ever entered
into his mind? The plaih meaning is, We establish both the
true sense and the effectual practice of it: We provide for its
being both understood and practised in its full extent.
“On those who reject the atonement, just severity.” (Page
157.) Was it ever possible for them not to reject it? If
not, how is it just to cast them into a lake of fire for not
doing what it was impossible they should do? Would it be
just (make it your own case) to cast you into hell for not
touching heaven with your hand?
“Justification is complete the first moment we believe, and
is incapable of augmentation.” (Page 159.) Not so: There
may be as many degrees in the favour as in the image of God.
“St. Paul often mentions a righteousness imputed:” Not a
righteousness, never once; but simply, righteousness. “What
can this be, but the righteousness of Christ?” (Page 190.)
He tells you himself, “To him that believeth on him that justi
fieth the ungodly, faith is imputed for righteousness.” (Rom.
iv. 5.) “Why is Christ styled Jehovah our Righteousness?”
Because we are both justified and sanctified through Him.
“My death, the cause of their forgiveness; my righteous
mess, the ground of their acceptance.” (Page 191.)
How does this agree with page 45?—“To ascribe pardon
to Christ's passive, eternal life to his active, righteousness, is
fanciful rather than judicious.”
“He commends such kinds of beneficence only, as were exer
A TREATISE ON JUSTIFICATION. 321
cised to a disciple as such.” (Page 195.) Is not this a slip
of the pen? Will not our Lord then commend, and reward
eternally, all kinds of beneficence, provided they flowed from
a principle of loving faith? yea, that which was exercised to
a Samaritan, a Jew, a Turk, or a Heathen? Even these I
would not term “transient bubbles,” though they do not
procure our justification.
“How must our righteousness exceed that of the Scribes
and Pharisees? Not only in being sincere, but in possessing
a complete righteousness, even that of Christ.” (Page 197.)
Did our Lord mean this? Nothing less. He specifies, in
the following parts of his Sermon, the very instances wherein
the righteousness of a Christian exceeds that of the Scribes
and Pharisees.
“He brings this specious hypocrite to the test.” (Page
198.) How does it appear that he was an hypocrite? Our
Lord gives not the least intimation of it. Surely he “loved
him,” not for his hypocrisy, but his sincerity
Yet he loved the world, and therefore could not keep any
of the commandments in their spiritual meaning. And the
keeping of these is undoubtedly the way to, though not the
cause of, eternal life.
“‘By works his faith was made perfect: Appeared to be
true.” (Page 200.) No.: The natural sense of the words is,
“By” the grace superadded while he wrought those “works,
his faith was” literally “made perfect.”
“‘He that doeth righteousness is righteous:” Manifests the
truth of his conversion.” (Ibid.) Nay, the plain meaning is,
He alone is truly righteous, whose faith worketh by love.
“St. James speaks of the justification of our faith.” (Page
201.) Not unless you mean, by that odd expression, our
faith being made perfect; for so the Apostle explains his own
meaning. Perhaps the word justified is once used by St.
Paul for manifested. But that does not prove it is to be so
understood here. -
“‘Whoso doeth these things shall never fall’ into total
apostasy.” (Page 202.) How pleasing is this to flesh and
blood! But David says no such thing. His meaning is, “Whoso
doeth these things” to the end “shall never fall” into hell.
The Seventh Dialogue is full of important truths. Yet
some expressions in it I cannot commend.
“‘One thing thou lackest,’—the imputed righteousness of
WOL. X. Y
322 PREFACE To
Christ.” (Page 216.) You cannot think this is the meaning
of the text. Certainly the “one thing” our Lord meant
was, the love of God. This was the thing he lacked.
“Is the obedience of Christ insufficient to accomplish our
justification?” (Page 222.) Rather I would ask, Is the death
of Christ insufficient to purchase it?
“The saints in glory ascribe the whole of their salvation
to the blood of the Lamb.” (Page 226.) So do 1; and yet
I believe “he obtained for all a possibility of salvation.”
“The terms of acceptance for fallen man were a full satis
faction to the divine justice, and a complete conformity to
the divine law.” (Page 227.) This you take for granted;
but I cannot allow it.
The terms of acceptance for fallen man are, repentance and
faith. “Repent ye, and believe the gospel.”
“There are but two methods whereby any can be justified,
either by a perfect obedience to the law, or because Christ
hath kept the law in our stead.” (Ibid.) You should say,
“Or by faith, in Christ.” I then answer, This is true; and
fallen man is justified, not by perfect obedience, but by faith.
What Christ has done is the foundation of our justification,
not the term or condition of it.
In the Eighth Dialogue likewise there are many great
truths, and yet some things liable to exception.
David “God himself dignifies with the most exalted of all
characters.” (Page 253.) Far, very far from it. We have
more exalted characters than David’s, both in the Old Testa
ment and the New. Such are those of Samuel, Daniel, yea,
and Job, in the former; of St. Paul and St. John, in the latter.
“But God styles him “a man after his own heart.’” This
is the text which has caused many to mistake, for want of
considering, First, that this is said of David in a particular
respect, not with regard to his whole character: Secondly,
the time at which it was spoken. When was David “a
man after God’s own heart?” When God found him
“following the ewes great with young,” when he “took him
from the sheep-folds.” (Psalm lxxviii. 70, 71.) It was in the
second or third year of Saul’s reign, that Samuel said to him,
“The Lord hath sought him a man after his own heart,
and hath commanded him to be captain over his people.”
(1 Sam. xiii. 14.) But was he “a man after God’s own
heart” all his life? or in all particulars? So far from it, that
A TREATISE ON JUSTIFICATION. 323
we have few more exceptionable characters among all the
men of God recorded in Scripture.
“There is not a just man upon earth that sinneth not.”
Solomon might truly say so, before Christ came. And St.
John might, after he came, say as truly, “Whosoever is born
of God sinneth not.” (Page 261.) But “in many things we
offend all.” That St. James does not speak this of himself,
or of real Christians, will clearly appear to all who impartially
consider the context.
The Ninth Dialogue proves excellently well, that we cannot
be justified by our works.
But have you throughly considered the words which occur
in the 270th page?
“O children of Adam, you are no longer obliged to love
God with all your strength, nor your neighbour as yourselves.
Once indeed I insisted on absolute purity of heart; now, I
can dispense with some degrees of evil desire. Since Christ
has fulfilled the law for you, you need not fulfil it. I will
connive at, yea, accommodate my demands to, your weakness.”
I agree with you, that “this doctrine makes the Holy One of
God a minister of sin.” And is it not your own Is not this
the very doctrine which you espouse throughout your book?
I cannot but except to several passages also in the Tenth
Dialogue. I ask, first,
“Does the righteousness of God ever mean,” as you affirm,
“the merits of Christ?” (Page 291.) I believe, not once in
all the Scripture. It often means, and particularly in the
Epistle to the Romans, God’s method of justifying sinners.
When, therefore, you say,
“The righteousness of God means, such a righteousness as
may justly challenge his acceptance,” (page 292,) I cannot
allow it at all; and this capital mistake must needs lead you
into many others. But I follow you step by step.
“In order to entitle us to a reward, there must be an
imputation of righteousness.” (Ibid.) There must be an
interest in Christ; and then “every man shall receive his
own reward, according to his own labour.”
“A rebel may be forgiven, without being restored to the
dignity of a son.” (Page 293.) A rebel against an earthly
King may; but not a rebel against God. In the very same
moment that God forgives, we are the sons of God. Therefore
this is an idle dispute. For pardon and acceptance, though
Y 2
324 PR EFACE To
they may be distinguished, cannot be divided. The words
of Job which you cite are wide of the question. Those of
Solomon prove no more than this, (and who denies it?)
that justification implies both pardon and acceptance.
“Grace reigneth through righteousness unto eternal life;”
(page 295;) that is, the free love of God brings us through
justification and sanctification to glory. “That they may
receive forgiveness, and a lot among the sanctified;” (ibid.;)
that is, that they may receive pardon, holiness, heaven.
“Is not the satisfaction made by the death of Christ
sufficient to obtain both our full pardon and final happiness?”
(Ibid.) Unquestionably it is, and neither of the texts you
cite proves the contrary.
“If it was requisite for Christ to be baptized, much more
to fulfil the moral law.” (Page 296.)
I cannot prove that either one or the other was requisite in
order to his purchasing redemption for us.
“By Christ's sufferings alone, the law was not satisfied.”
(Page 297.) Yes, it was; for it required only the alternative,
Obey or die. It required no man to obey and die too. If
any man had perfectly obeyed, he would not have died.
“Where the Scripture ascribes the whole of our salvation to
the death of Christ, a part of his humiliation is put for the
whole.” (Ibid.) I cannot allow this without some proof. “He
was obedient unto death,” is no proof at all; as it does not
necessarily imply any more, than that he died in obedience to
the Father. In some texts there is a necessity of taking a
part for the whole. But in these there is no such necessity.
“Christ undertook to do everything necessary for our
redemption;” (page 300;) namely, in a covenant made with
the Father. It is sure he did everything necessary; but how
does it appear that he undertook this before the foundation
of the world, and that by a positive covenant between him
and the Father?
You think this appears from four texts: 1. From that,
“Thou gavest them to me.” Nay, when any believe, “the
Father gives them to Christ.” But this proves no such
previous contract. 2. “God hath laid upon him the iniquities
of us all.” Neither does this prove any such thing. 3. That
expression, “The counsel of peace shall be between them,”
does not necessarily imply any more, than that both the
Father and the Son would concur in the redemption of man.
A TREATISE ON JUSTIFICATION. 325
4. “According to the counsel of his will;” that is, in the way
or method he had chosen. Therefore, neither any of these
texts, nor all of them, prove what they were brought to
prove. They do by no means prove, that there ever was any
such covenant made between the Father and the Son.
“The conditions of the covenant are recorded: ‘Lo, I
come to do thy will.’” (Page 301.) Nay, here is no mention
of any covenant, nor anything from which it can be inferred.
“The recompense stipulated in this glorious treaty.” But I
see not one word of the treaty itself. Nor can I possibly
allow the existence of it, without far other proof than this.
“Another copy of this grand treaty is recorded, Isaiah xlix,
from the first to the sixth verse.” (Ibid.) I have read them,
but cannot find a word about it in all those verses. They
contain neither more nor less than a prediction of the
salvation of the Gentiles.
“By the covenant of works man was bound to obey in his
own person.” (Page 302.) And so he is under the covenant
of grace; though not in order to his justification. “The
obedience of our surety is accepted instead of our own.”
This is neither a safe nor a scriptural way of speaking. I
would simply say, “We are accepted through the Beloved.
We have redemption through his blood.”
“The second covenant was not made with Adam, or any
of his posterity, but with Christ, in those words: ‘The seed
of the woman shall bruise the serpent's head.’” (Page 303.)
For any authority you have from these words, you might as
well have said, it was made with the Holy Ghost. These
words were not spoken to Christ, but of him; and give not
the least intimation of any such covenant as you plead for.
They manifestly contain, if not a covenant made with, a
promise made to, Adam and all his posterity.
“Christ, we see, undertook to execute the conditions.”
(Ibid.) We see no such thing in this text. We see here
only a promise of a Saviour made by God to man.
“It is true, I cannot fulfil the conditions.” (Ibid.) It is
not true. The conditions of the new covenant are, “Repent
and believe.” And these you can fulfil, through Christ
strengthening you. “It is equally true, this is not required
at my hands.” It is equally true; that is, absolutely false:
And most dangerously false. If we allow this, Antinomian
ism comes in with a full tide. “Christ has performed all
326 PREFACE TO
that was conditionary for me.” Has He repented and
believed for you? You endeavour to evade this by saying,
“He performed all that was conditionary in the covenant of
works.” This is nothing to the purpose; for we are not
talking of that, but of the covenant of grace. Now, he did
not perform all that was conditionary in this covenant, unless
he repented and believed. “But he did unspeakably more.”
It may be so. But he did not do this.
“But if Christ’s perfect obedience be ours, we have no
more need of pardon than Christ himself.” (Page 308.) The
consequence is good. You have started an objection which
you cannot answer. You say indeed, “Yes, we do need
pardon; for in many things we offend all.” What then?
If his obedience be ours, we still perfectly obey in him.
“Both the branches of the law, the preceptive and the
penal, in the case of guilt contracted, must be satisfied.”
(Page 309.) Not so. “Christ by his death alone” (so our
Church teaches) “fully satisfied for the sins of the whole
world.” The same great truth is manifestly taught in the
Thirty-first Article. Is it therefore fair, is it honest, for any
one to plead the Articles of our Church in defence of absolute
predestination; seeing the Seventeenth Article barely defines
the term, without either affirming or denying the thing;
whereas the Thirty-first totally overthrows and razes it from
the foundation ?
“Believers, who are notorious transgressors in themselves,
have a sinless obedience in Christ.” (Ibid.) O syren song !
Pleasing sound to James Wheatley, Thomas Williams, James
Relly |
I know not one sentence in the Eleventh Dialogue which
is liable to exception; but that grand doctrine of Christianity,
original sin, is therein proved by irrefragable arguments.
The Twelfth, likewise, is unexceptionable; and contains
such an illustration of the wisdom of God in the structure of
the human body, as I believe cannot be paralleled in either
ancient or modern writers.
The former part of the Thirteenth Dialogue is admirable:
To the latter I have some objection.
“Elijah failed in his resignation, and even Moses spake
unadvisedly with his lips.” (Vol. II., page 44.) It is true;
but if you could likewise fix some blot upon venerable
Samuel and beloved Daniel, it would prove nothing. For no
A TREATISE ON JUSTIFICATION. 327
scripture teaches, that the holiness of Christians is to be
measured by that of any Jew.
“Do not the best of men frequently feel disorder in their
affections? Do not they often complain, ‘When I would do
good, evil is present with me?’” (Page 46.) I believe not.
You and I are only able to answer for ourselves. “Do not
they say, ‘We groan, being burdened with the workings of
inbred corruption?’” You know, this is not the meaning
of the text. The whole context shows, the Cause of that
groaning was their longing “to be with Christ.”
“The cure” of sin “will be perfected in heaven.” (Page
47.) Nay, surely in paradise, if no sooner. “This is a
noble prerogative of the beatific vision.” No; it will then
come too late. If sin remains in us till the day of judgment,
it will remain for ever. “Our present blessedness does not
consist in being free from sin.” I really think it does. But
whether it does or no, if we are not free from sin, we are not
Christian believers. For to all these the Apostle declares,
“Being made free from sin, ye are become the servants of
righteousness.” (Rom. vi. 18.)
“If we were perfect in piety,” (St. John’s word is, “perfect
in love,”) “Christ's priestly office would be superseded.” No.;
we should still need his Spirit, and consequently his inter
cession, for the continuance of that love from moment to
moment. Beside, we should still be encompassed with infirmi
ties, and liable to mistakes, from which words or actions might
follow, even though the heart was all love, which were not
exactly right. Therefore, in all these respects, we should
still have need of Christ's priestly office; and therefore, as
long as he remains in the body, the greatest saint may say,
“Every moment, Lord, I need
The merit of thy death.”
The text cited from Exodus asserts nothing less than, that
iniquity “cleaves to all our holy things till death.”
“Sin remains, that the righteousness of faith may have its
due honour.” (Page 48.) And will the righteousness of faith
have its due honour no longer than sin remains in us? Then
it must remain not only on earth and in paradise, but in heaven
also. “And the sanctification of the Spirit its proper esteem.”
Would it not have more esteem, if it were a perfect work?
“It’’ (sin) “will make as lowly in our own eyes.” (Ibid.)
328 PREFACE To
What! will pride make us lowly? Surely the utter destruc
tion of pride would do this more effectually. “It will make
us compassionate.” Would not an entire renewal in the
image of God make us much more so? “It will teach us to
admire the riches of grace.” Yea, but a fuller experience of
it, by a thorough sanctification of spirit, soul, and body, will
make us admire it more. “It will reconcile us to death.”
Indeed it will not; nor will anything do this like perfect love.
“It will endear the blood and intercession of Christ.” (Page
49.) Nay, these can never be so dear to any as to those who
experience their full virtue, who are “filled with the fulness”
of God. Nor can any “feel their continual need” of Christ,
or “rely on him,” in the manner which these do.
“The claims of the law are all answered.” (Dialogue 14,
page 57.) If so, Count Zinzendorf is absolutely in the right:
Neither God nor man can claim my obedience to it. Is not
this Antinomianism without a mask?
“Your sins are expiated through the death of Christ, and
a righteousness given you by which you have free access to
God.” (Page 59.) This is not scriptural language. I would
simply say, “By him we have access to the Father.”
There are many other expressions in this Dialogue to which
I have the same objection; namely, 1. That they are unscrip
tural; 2. That they directly lead to Antinomianism.
The First Letter contains some very useful heads of self
examination. In the Second, I read, “There is a righteous
ness which supplies all that the creature needs. To prove
this momentous point is the design of the following sheets.”
(Page 91.)
I have seen such terrible effects of this unscriptural way of
speaking, even on those “who had once clean escaped from
the pollutions of the world,” that I cannot but earnestly wish
you would speak no otherwise than do the oracles of God.
Certainly this mode of expression is not momentous. It is
always dangerous, often fatal.
“Where sin abounded, grace did much more abound; that
as sin had reigned unto death, so might grace,” the free love
of God, “reign through righteousness,” through our justifi
cation and sanctification, “unto eternal life.” (Rom. v. 20,
21.) This is the plain, natural meaning of the words. It
does not appear that one word is spoken here about imputed
righteousness; neither in the passages cited in the next page
A TREATISE ON JUSTIFICATION. 329
from the Common Prayer and the Articles. In the Homily
likewise that phrase is not found at all, and the main stress
is laid on Christ's shedding his blood. Nor is the phrase
(concerning the thing there is no question) found in any part
of the Homilies. (Letter 3, page 93.)
“If the Fathers are not explicit with regard to the imputa
tion of active righteousness, they abound in passages which
evince the substitution of Christ in our stead; passages which
disclaim all dependence on any duties of our own, and fix our
hopes wholly on the merits of our Saviour. When this is the
case, I am very little solicitous about any particular forms of
expression.” (Page 101.) O lay aside then those questionable,
dangerous forms, and keep closely to the scriptural !
“The authority of our Church, and of those eminent
Divines,” (Letter 4, p. 105,) does not touch those “particular
forms of expression;” neither do any of the texts which you
afterwards cite. As to the doctrine, we are agreed.
“The righteousness of God signifies the righteousness
which God-Man wrought out.” (Ibid.) No; it signifies God’s
method of justifying sinners.
“The victims figured the expiation by Christ’s death; the
clothing with skins, the imputation of his righteousness.”
(Page 107.) That does not appear. Did not the one rather
figure our justification; the other, our sanctification ?
Almost every text quoted in this and the following letter in
support of that particular form of expression is distorted above
measure from the plain, obvious meaning which is pointed out
by the context. I shall instance in a few, and just set down
their true meaning without any farther remarks. (Page 109.)
To “show unto man his uprightness;” to convince him
of God’s justice in so punishing him.
“He shall receive the blessing,” pardon, “from the Lord,
and righteousness,” holiness, “from the God of his salva
tion;” the God who saveth him both from the guilt and from
the power of sin. (Page 110.)
I will “make mention of thy righteousness only:” Of thy
mercy; so the word frequently means in the Old Testament.
So it unquestionably means in that text, “In’’ or by “thy
righteousness shall they be exalted.” (Page 111.)
“Sion shall be redeemed with judgment,” after severe
punishment, “and her converts with righteousness,” with the
tender mercy of God following that punishment. (Page 112.)
330 PREFACE To
“In,” or through, “the Lord I have righteousness and
strength,” justification and sanctification; “he hath clothed me
with the garments of salvation,” saved me from the guilt and
power of sin; both of which are again expressed by, “He hath
covered me with the robe of righteousness.” (Page 113.)
“My righteousness,” my mercy, “shall not be abolished.”
(Page 114.)•
“To make reconciliation for iniquity,” to atone for all
our sins, “and to bring in everlasting righteousness,” spotless
holiness into our souls. And this righteousness is not human,
but divine. It is the gift and the work of God. (Page 116.)
“The Lord our Righteousness;” the author both of our
justification and sanctification. (Page 117.)
“What righteousness shall give us peace at the last day,
inherent or imputed?” (Page 127.) Both. Christ died for
us and lives in us, “that we may have boldness in the day of
judgment.”
“That have obtained like precious faith through the
righteousness,” the mercy, “of our Lord.” “Seek ye the
kingdom of God and his righteousness,” the holiness which
springs from God reigning in you. (Letter 5, p. 131.)
“Therein is revealed the righteousness of God,” God’s
method of justifying sinners. (Page 132.)
“We establish the law, as we expect no salvation without
a perfect conformity to it, namely, by Christ.” (Page 135.)
ls not this a mere quibble? and a quibble which, after all the
laboured evasions of Witsius and a thousand more, does totally
“make void the law P” But not so does St. Paul teach.
According to him, “without holiness,” personal holiness, “no
man shall see the Lord;” none who is not himself conformed
to the law of God here, “shall see the Lord” in glory.
This is the grand, palpable objection to that whole scheme.
It directly “makes void the law.” It makes thousands
content to live and die “transgressors of the law,” because
Christ fulfilled it “for them.” Therefore, though I believe
he hath lived and died for me, yet I would speak very
tenderly and sparingly of the former, (and never separately
from the latter,) even as sparingly as do the Scriptures, for
fear of this dreadful consequence.
“‘The gift of righteousness’ must signify a righteousness
not their own.” (Page 138.) Yes, it signifies the righteous
ness or holiness which God gives to, and works in, them.
A TREATISE ON JUSTIFICATION. 331
“‘The obedience of one’ is Christ’s actual performance of
the whole law.” (Page 139.) So here his passion is fairly left
out! Whereas his “becoming obedient unto death,” that is
dying for man, is certainly the chief part, if not the whole,
which is meant by that expression.
“‘That the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in
us; that is, by our representative in our nature.” (Ibid.)
Amazing ! But this, you say, “agrees with the tenor of the
Apostle’s arguing. For he is demonstrating, we cannot be
justified by our own conformity to the law.” No; not here.
He is not speaking here of the cause of our justification, but
the fruits of it. Therefore, that unnatural sense of his words
does not at all “agree with the tenor of his arguing.”
I totally deny the criticism on 8.xxioavvm and Bixaloux,
and cannot conceive on what authority it is founded. O
how deep an aversion to inward holiness does this scheme
naturally create 1 (Page 140.)
“The righteousness they attained could not be any personal
righteousness.” (Page 142) Certainly it was: It was implanted
as well as imputed.
“For ‘instruction in righteousness, in the righteousness
of Christ.” (Page 145.) Was there ever such a comment
before? The plain meaning is, “for training up in holiness”
of heart and of life.
“He shall convince the world of righteousness;” that I
am not a sinner, but innocent and holy. (Page 146.)
“‘That we might be made the righteousness of God in
him. Not intrinsically, but imputatively.” (Page 148.)
Both the one and the other. God, through him, first accounts
and then makes us righteous. Accordingly,
“‘The righteousness which is of God by faith, is both
imputed and inherent.” (Page 152.)
“My faith fixes on both the meritorious life and atoning
death of Christ.” (Page 153.) Here we clearly agree.
Hold then to this, and never talk of the former without the
latter. If you do, you cannot say, “Here we are exposed to
no hazard.” Yes, you are to an exceeding great one; even
the hazard of living and dying without holiness. And then
we are lost for ever.
The Sixth Letter contains an admirable account of the
earth and atmosphere, and comprises abundance of sense in
a narrow compass, expressed in beautiful language.
332 PREFACE to
Gems have “a seat on the virtuous fair one’s breast.” (Page
177.) I cannot reconcile this with St. Paul. He says, “Not
with pearls;” by a parity of reason, Not with diamonds. But in
all things I perceive you are too favourable, both to “the desire
of the flesh, and the desire of the eye.” You are a gentle casuist
as to every self-indulgence which a plentiful fortune can furnish.
“Our Saviour’s obedience.” (Page 182.) O say, with the
good old Puritans, “Our Saviour's death or merits!” We
swarm with Antinomians on every side. Why are you at
such pains to increase their number?
“My mouth shall show forth thy righteousness and thy salva
tion;” thy mercy, which brings my salvation. (Page 194.)
The Eighth Letter is an excellent description of the
supreme greatness of Christ. I do not observe one sentence
in it, which I cannot cheerfully subscribe to.
The Ninth Letter, containing a description of the sea, with
various inferences deduced therefrom, is likewise a masterpiece,
for justness of sentiment, as well as beauty of language. But I
doubt whether “mere shrimps” (page 241) be not too low an
expression; and whether you might not as well have said nothing
of “cod, the standing repast of lent;” or concerning “the
exquisite relish of turbot, or the deliciousness of sturgeon.”
Are not such observations beneath the dignity of a Minister of
Christ? I have the same doubt concerning what is said of
“delicately flavoured tea, finely scented coffee, the friendly
bowl, the pyramid of Italian figs, and the pastacia-nut of
Aleppo.” (Page 264) Beside that the mentioning these in
such a manner is a strong encouragement of luxury and
sensuality. And does the world need this? The English
in particular ! Si non insaniunt satis sua sponte, instiga.*
“Those treasures which spring from the imputation of
Christ's righteousness.” (Letter 10, p. 271.) Not a word of
his atoning blood | Why do so many men love to speak of
his righteousness, rather than his atonement? I fear, because
it affords a fairer excuse for their own unrighteousness. To
cut off this, is it not better to mention both together? at
least, never to name the former without the latter?
“Faith is a persuasion that Christ has shed his blood for me,
and fulfilled all righteousness in my stead.” (Page 285.) I
* This quotation from Terence is thus translated by Colman :
“If he raves not of himself enough,
Do irritate him.”-EDIT.
A. TREATISE ON JUSTIFICATION. 333
can by no means subscribe to this definition. There are
hundreds, yea, thousands of true believers, who never once
thought one way or the other of Christ's fulfilling all
righteousness in their stead. I personally know many who,
to this very hour, have no idea of it; and yet have each of
them a divine evidence and conviction, “Christ loved me,
and gave himself for me.” This is St. Paul’s account of
faith; and it is sufficient. He that thus believes is justified.
“It is a sure means of purifying the heart, and never fails
to work by love.” (Page 287.) It surely purifies the heart,
—if we abide in it; but not if we “draw back to perdition.”
It never fails to work by love while it continues; but if itself
fail, farewell both love and good works.
“Faith is the hand which receives all that is laid up in
Christ.” Consequently, if we make “shipwreck of the
faith,” how much soever is laid up in Christ, from that hour
we receive nothing.
“Faith in the imputed righteousness of Christ is a funda
mental principle in the gospel.” (Letter 11, p. 288.) If so,
what becomes of all those who think nothing about imputed
righteousness? How many who are full of faith and love, if
this be true, must perish everlastingly !
“Thy hands must urge the way of the deadly weapon through
the shivering flesh, till it be plunged in the throbbing heart.”
(Page 297.) Are not these descriptions far too strong? May
they not occasion unprofitable reasonings in many readers?
Ne pueros coran populo Medea trucidet.*
“How can he justify it to the world?” (Page 298.) Not
at all. Can this then justify his faith to the world?
“You take the certain way to obtain comfort,—the
righteousness of Jesus Christ.” (Page 304.) What, without
the atonement? Strange fondness for an unscriptural,
dangerous mode of expression
“So the merits of Christ are derived to all the faithful.”
(Page 306.) Rather, the fruits of the Spirit; which are
likewise plainly typified by the oil in Zechariah’s vision.
“Has the law any demand? It must go to him for satis
faction.” (Page 310.) Suppose, “Thou shalt love thy
neighbour as thyself;” then I am not obliged to love my
* The following is Lord Roscommon's translation of this verse from Horace :
“Medea must not draw her murdering knife,
Nor spill her children's blood, upon the stage.”—EDIT.
334 PREFACE TO
neighbour: Christ has satisfied the demand of the law for
me. Is not this the very quintessence of Antinomianism?
“The righteousness wrought out by Jesus Christ is
wrought out for all his people, to be the cause of their
justification, and the purchase of their salvation. The
righteousness is the cause, and the purchase.” (Page 311.)
So the death of Christ is not so much as named ! “For all
his people.” But what becomes of all other people? They
must inevitably perish for ever. The die was cast or ever
they were in being. The doctrine to pass them by has
Consign'd their unborn souls to hell,
And damn'd them from their mother's womb :
I could sooner be a Turk, a Deist, yea, an Atheist, than I
could believe this. It is less absurd to deny the very being
of God, than to make him an almighty tyrant.
“The whole world and all its seasons are rich with our
Creator’s goodness. His tender mercies are over all his
works.” (Page 318.) Are they over the bulk of mankind?
Where is his goodness to the non-elect? How are his tender
mercies over them? “His temporal blessings are given to
them.” But are they to them blessings at all? Are they
not all curses? Does not God know they are? that they will
only increase their damnation? Does not he design they
should? And this you call goodness: This is tender mercy!
“May we not discern pregnant proofs of goodness in each
individual object?” (Page 321.) No; on your scheme, not
a spark of it, in this world or the next, to the far greater
part of the work of his own hands.
“Is God a generous benefactor to the meanest animals, to
the lowest reptiles? And will he deny my friend what is
necessary to his present comfort, and his final acceptance?”
(Page 334.) Yea, will he deny it to any soul that he has
made? Would you deny it to any, if it were in your power?
But if you loved whom God abhorr'd,
The servant were above his Lord.
“The ‘wedding garment’ here means holiness.” (Page 337.)
“This is his tender complaint, ‘They will not come unto
me!’” (Page 340.) Nay, that is not the case; they
cannot. He himself has decreed, not to give them that
grace without which their coming is impossible.
“The grand end which God proposes in all his favourable
A TREATISE ON JUSTIFICATION. 335
dispensations to fallen man is, to demonstrate the sove
reignty of his grace.” Not so: To impart happiness to his
creatures is his grand end herein. Barely to demonstrate
his sovereignty is a principle of action fit for the great Turk,
not the most high God.
“God hath pleasure in the prosperity of his servants. He is
a boundless ocean of good.” (Page 341.) Nay, that ocean is far
from boundless, if it wholly passes by nine tenths of mankind.
“You cannot suppose God would enter into a fresh
covenant with a rebel.” (Page 342.) I both suppose and
know he did. “God made the new covenant with Christ,
and charged him with the performance of the conditions.”
I deny both these assertions, which are the central point
wherein Calvinism and Antinomianism meet. “‘I have
made a covenant with my chosen;’” namely, with “David
my servant.” So God himself explains it.
“He will wash you in the blood which atones, and invest you
with the righteousness which justifies.” (Page 362.) Why
should you thus continually put asunder what God has joined?
“God himself at the last day pronounces them righteous,
because they are interested in the obedience of the
Redeemer.” (Page 440.) Rather, because they are washed
in his blood, and renewed by his Spirit.
Upon the whole, I cannot but wish that the plan of these
Dialogues had been executed in a different manner. Most
of the grand truths of Christianity are herein both explained
and proved with great strength and clearness. Why was
anything intermixed which could prevent any serious Chris
tian’s recommending them to all mankind? anything which
must necessarily render them exceptionable to so many
thousands of the children of God? In practical writings, I
studiously abstain from the very shadow of controversy.
Nay, even in controversial, I do not knowingly write one line,
to which any but my opponent would object. For opinions,
shall I destroy the work of God? Then am I a bigot indeed.
Much more, if I would not drop any mode of expression, rather
than offend either Jew, or Gentile, or the Church of God.
I am, with great sincerity,
Dear Sir,
Your affectionate brother and servant,
JOHN WESLEY.
336 PREFACE TO
3. After waiting near two years, and receiving no answer
to the second any more than the first Letter, in 1758 I
printed “A Preservative against Unsettled Notions in
Religion.” I designed this at first only for the Preachers
who were in connexion with me. But I was afterwards
induced to think it might be of use to others that were under
my care. I designed it for these, and these alone, though I
could not help its falling into other hands. Accordingly, I
said, “My design in publishing the following Tracts, is not
to reclaim, but to preserve.” To preserve those to whom I
had frequently and strongly recommended Mr. Hervey’s
Dialogues, from what I disapproved of therein, I inserted the
above Letter; and that without any addition, as intending it
only “for those who already knew the truth,” whom I wished
to preserve from everything wrong, while they profited by
what was admirably right, in his Dialogues. No wonder there
fore that those notes (as Mr. Hervey remarks in the same
page) “have rather the air of a caveat than a confutation.” I
never intended them for a confutation; and even when I sent
them to the press, I designed them merely as a caveat to my
friends against imbibing truth and error together.
4. A considerable time after, I was much surprised by an
information, that Mr. Hervey “was going to publish against
me.” I immediately wrote a short letter to him, which his
friends may easily find among his papers. It was to this
effect, and, so far as I can recollect, nearly in these words:
“After waiting above a year for an answer to my last
letter, I printed it in the close of a larger treatise. If you
have anything to object to me, I expect that, as a
gentleman and a Christian, you will behave to me as I did to
you. Send me the letter first. And if I do not give you a
satisfactory answer in a year, then publish it to all the world.”
I am inclined to believe, this prevented the publication of
these papers during his life. And with his dying breath, (I
have it under his brother’s hand,) he desired they might not
be published at all. How comes it then to be done now? I
suppose, through the zeal of those who are so vehemently
attached to their own opinions, that they would sacrifice all
things to them; and who may sincerely believe, that the
bringing any reproach upon me would be “doing God service.”
5. In this prefatory discourse, I do not intend to “answer
Mr. Hervey’s book.” Shall my hand be upon that saint of
A TREATISE ON JUSTIFICATION. 337
God? No; let him rest in Abraham’s bosom. When my
warfare is accomplished, may I rest with him till the resurrec
tion of the just 1 Nor do I intend to say anything on those
questions, whether Christ was the Mediator of the new cove
nant, or one of the contracting parties, or both the Mediator
and a contracting party; neither indeed on any point of
Calvinism: Herein I think and let think. I do not design to
contend about the phrase, imputed righteousness; nor yet
about the sense of it. I cannot explain this more fully or
clearly than it is done in the ensuing Tract. I purpose only to
speak a little on the personal accusations which are brought
against me; and I doubt not but I shall convince all impartial
men that I am clear of the things laid to my charge.
6. The chief of these are twelve. I might reckon many
more; but they are all reducible to one or other of these.
Each of these accusations is frequently repeated, and in great
variety of language. But I shall be easily excused for citing
only a few out of numerous passages to the same effect.
The First is, that I “assert things without proof.” This
is undoubtedly true. In the Letter before us, I touch upon
many things, without once attempting to prove them. For I
designed only, (1.) To warn a friend, and give him matter
for farther consideration. (2.) To guard others from slipping
into mistakes. Therefore Mr. Hervey need not have said,
“Never did I meet with a person who seemed so totally
ignorant, that there is a wide difference between saying and
proving.” (Page 236.) I am not ignorant of this; and so
my friend would have found, had he favoured me with a
private answer. It would then have lain upon me to prove
what I had barely said before.
7. I am accused, Secondly, of being self-sufficient, positive,
magisterial. “Mr. Wesley, cased in his own self-sufficiency,
esteems all these evidences as mere nothings. Reason, grammar,
precedents are eclipsed by his bare negative.” (Page 246.)
I know not which way this can be inferred from anything
I have spoken to Mr. Hervey.
“Mr. Wesley replies, with the solemnity of a censor, and
the authority of a dictator, ‘No.’” (Page 90.)
I am not conscious, that, in making that reply, I assumed
any authority at all.
“Here I see nothing but the usual argument, the master's
ipse divit.” (Page 139.)
WOL. X.
338 PREFACE TO
Love might have seen the friend, not the master, taking
the liberty which he had been entreated to take.
“Strange | That a man of ordinary discernment should
offer to obtrude upon the public such a multitude of naked,
unsupported, magisterial assertions! should ever be able to
persuade himself, that a positive air would pass for demon
stration 1" (Page 240.)
I thought nothing of the public when I wrote this Letter,
but spoke freely and artlessly to a friend; and I spoke as a
friend, (so far as I can judge,) not a censor or dictator.
8. I am accused, Thirdly, of reasoning loosely and wildly.
“Is not this the loose way of arguing you blame in Mr.
Wesley?” (Page 233.)
“What wild reasoning is here ! Such premises and such
an inference” (but they are none of mine) “will probably
incline the reader to think of a sunbeam and a clod,
connected with bands of smoke.” (Page 103.)
When I write for the public, especially in controversy, J
seek for connected arguments. Sed nunc non eral his locus.*
The compass of a letter would hardly admit of them.
9. I am accused, in the Fourth place, of self-contradiction.
“See how you are entangled in your own net; how, without
being chased by an enemy, you run yourself aground. You
avouch palpable inconsistencies.” (Page 195.)
“Will Mr. Wesley never have done with self-contradiction?
Why will he give me such repeated cause to complain, Quo
teneam vultum mutantem Protea nodo?”t (Page 142.) “See,
my friend, how thy own mouth condemneth thee, and not I;
yea, thy own lips testify against thee! If you persist in
such palpable inconsistencies, who can forbear taking up that
taunting proverb, “A double-minded man is unstable in all
his ways?’” (Page 223.)
“Contradiction, didst thou ever know so trusty a friend, or so
faithful a devotee? Many people are ready enough to contra
dict others. But it seems all one to this gentleman, whetherit
be another or himself, so he may but contradict.” (Page 227.)
Could one imagine, that Mr. Hervey had added to this very
page, a note wherein are these words, “The contemptuous and
* But now in these private communications they have no place.—EDIT.
+ This quotation from Horace is thus translated by Boscawen :
“With what strong chain can I o'erpower
This Proteus, changing every hour?"-EDIT.
a TREATISE ON JUSTIFICATION. 339
the reproachful, even when really deserved, can have no
tendency to confirm our argument, but to provoke resent
ment. They are not the most promising means of joining us
together in one mind and judgment; but rather the sure
way to widen the breach and increase animosity,”
These I acknowledge as Mr. Hervey's words; for they breathe
Mr. Hervey’s spirit. But if so, the former came from another
heart, though perhaps they were transcribed by his hand.
But whence arises this whole charge of inconsistency and
self-contradiction? Merely from straining, winding to and
fro, and distorting a few innocent words. For wherein have I
contradicted myself, taking words in their unforced, natural
construction, or even changed my judgment in any one
respect, with regard to justification, (nay, Mr. Hervey, in one
of his Letters, formerly published, blames me for “never
changing my judgment at all !”) since I printed the sermon
on “Salvation by Faith,” in the year 1738? From that day
I have steadily believed and uniformly asserted, as all my
writings testify, (1.) That the only cause of our present and
eternal salvation is what Christ has done and suffered for us.
(2.) That we are justified and sanctified by faith alone, faith
in him who lived and died for us. Let my words be twisted
and wire-drawn ever so long, they will not fairly bear any other
meaning, nor, without apparent violence, contradict either of
these propositions. It is true, (3.) That I have, during this
whole time, occasionally used those expressions, imputed
righteousness, the righteousness of Christ, and others of the
same kind,—although the verses cited in several of Mr.
Hervey’s Letters are not mine, but my brother's. But it is
equally true, (4.) That I never used them at all, in any other
meaning than that sound, scriptural one, wherein they are
used by many eminent men, Calvin in particular. I choose
not to speak farther on this head, lest I should be under a
disagreeable necessity of saying anything that might even
seem disrespectful to my ever-loved and honoured friend.
10. I am accused, Fifthly, of not understanding criticism
and divinity. “What a piddling criticism is this !” (Page
220.)
“I can no more admire your taste as a critic, than your
doctrine as a Divine.” (Page 145.)
“In this interpretation I can neither discern the true
critic, nor the sound Divine.” (Page 214)
Z 2
340 PREFACE TO
I am not a judge in my own cause. What I am ignorant
of, I desire to learn.
I do not know whether the following charge may not fall
under this head:—
“In another person, this would look like profane levity:
In Mr. Wesley, the softest appellation we can give it is idle
pomp.” (Page 7.)
What | The using the expression, “for Christ's sake?”
The whole paragraph runs thus:
“‘We are not solicitous as to any particular set of phrases.’
(Page 212.) Then for Christ’s sake, and for the sake of the
souls which he has purchased with his blood, do not dispute
for that particular phrase, the imputed righteousness of Christ.
It is not scriptural; it is not necessary. Men who scruple
to use, men who never heard, the expression, may yet ‘be
humbled as repenting criminals at his feet, and rely as
devoted pensioners on his merits.” But it has done immense
hurt. I have had abundant proof, that the frequent use of
this unnecessary phrase, instead of furthering men's progress
in vital holiness, has made them satisfied without any holiness
at all.” Is the speaking earnestly on such a subject “idle
pomp?” Are not the souls of men at stake? And most
certainly the whole sentence is at as great a distance from
levity as from profaneness.
11. I am accused, Sixthly, of acting in a manner unworthy
a gentleman, a Christian, or a man of sense.
“I am quite ashamed of your meanness,” (strong words !)
“ and grieved at your uncharitable rashness;” in naming three
men, the fellows of whom, I hope, are not to be found in
England. “How unworthy is such a proceeding either of the
gentleman, the Christian, or the man of sense !” (Page 186.)
I am not conscious of either meanness, rashness, or uncharit
ableness in this matter. But I am willing to refer it to the
judgment of any who know the men and their communication.
12. I am accused, Seventhly, of impudence.
“Harmless enough, I must own; but what follows is not
quite so modest.” (Page 201.)
“Your last daring innovation.” Affirming that the word
usually rendered righteousness does sometimes mean mercy.
I dare not say otherwise. I must affirm this still, both of
the Hebrew and Greek word.
“Everybody knows that the particle beth signifies in, and
A TREATISE ON JUSTIFICATION. 341
everybody but Mr. Wesley would blush to assert the
contrary.” (Page 220.)
I never asserted the contrary, nor did I ever deny, that the
particle sy likewise signifies in. Yet I affirm that both the
former and the latter have several other significations.-
13. I am accused, Eighthly, of denying justification by
faith, and of being an enemy to the righteousness of Christ.
“We have liberty to look upon ourselves as justified with
out any works of our own.” (True; but not without faith.)
“This you would supersede and abolish.” (Page 261.)
The whole tenor of my writing, preaching, and conversa
tion clears me of this charge.
“Why should you be so averse to the righteousness of God
our Saviour?” (Page 227.)
Far, very far from it. I admire, love, and embrace it,
as the ground of all my hope, as the only foundation of every
blessing, in time and in eternity.
“Why should you ransack all the stores of your learning
and knowledge, to exclude this glorious truth from the Bible?”
I do just the contrary. I use whatever knowledge God
has given me, to defend that glorious truth, “Jesus Christ is
made of God unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and sancti
fication, and redemption.”
14. The Ninth accusation is short: You are an heretic,
and your doctrine poisonous.
“You scarce distinguish yourself by this language from
an heretic. You may rank with the Arian and Socinian.”
(Page 140.)
What is this language? The saying, “The free love of
God brings us through justification and sanctification to
glory.” True; neither do I distinguish myself from a Jew,
by saying, “There is one God.” Does it follow, that I may
rank with Jews? that I am a Jew too?
“Such errors are extremely pernicious. They are like
poison mixed with food.” (Page 120.)
Let those errors be pointed out and proved. I shall then
willingly retract them.-
15. I am- accused, Tenthly, with being an Antinomian.
“‘Do you then establish the law?’ Are not you the
Antinomian P” (Page 143.)
I should not imagine Mr. Hervey was in earnest here, but
that I read in another place,—
342 PREFACE TO
“It is one of your leading errors, that you form low, scarty
apprehensions of God’s law.” (Page 69.)
What apprehensions I form of God’s law, any one may see
in the second and third volumes of my Sermons; wherein,
after explaining all the particular branches of it contained in
our Lord's Sermon on the Mount, I say of it in general,
Vol. V., p. 438:—
“This law is an incorruptible picture of the High and Holy
One that inhabiteth eternity. It is He whom in his essence no
man hath seen or can see, made visible to men and angels. It
is the face of God unveiled; God manifested to his creatures,
as they are able to bear it. It is the heart of God disclosed to
man; yea, in some sense, we may apply to his law what the
Apostle says of his Son, it is ‘the streaming forth or out
beaming of his glory, the express image of his person.’
“What is the law but divine virtue and wisdom, assuming
a visible form? What is it but the original ideas of truth and
good, which were lodged in the uncreated mind from eternity,
now drawn forth and clothed with such a vehicle, as to appear
even to human understanding?
“The law of God is a copy of the eternal mind, a transcript
of the divine nature; yea, it is the fairest offspring of the ever
lasting Father, the brightest efflux of his essential wisdom, the
visible beauty of the Most High.” Are these low and scanty
apprehensions of God’s law? Or are any such found in the
preceding sermons? Can any one form higher apprehensions
of it? If not, let this accusation sink for ever.
16. I am accused, in the Eleventh place, for teaching
Popish doctrine :
“Mr. Wesley, setting aside pardon and reconciliation,
together with the one perfect righteousness that procures
them,” (I set aside neither the one or the other,) “ascribes all
to the love of God. This notion may pass current at Rome,
but not among the Protestant Churches.” (Page 101.)
“This was the doctrine established by the Council of Trent.”
(But it is not mine.) “This is still maintained in the con
clave of Rome.” (Page 117.) But it is not maintained by
me, nor any of my friends. We teach quite the contrary.
“I acquit you from the charge of being a Jesuit or a
Papist;” (so far, so good;) “but nobody, I apprehend, can
acquit your principles from halting between Protestantism and
Popery:” (No more than the principles of all who believe that
A TREATISE ON JUSTIFICAT1ON. 343
“Christ tasted death for every man:”) “You have stolen the
unhallowed fire, and are infected with the leaven of Antichrist.
You have adopted papistical tenets,” (I know not which, and
should be glad any one would inform me,) “and are listening
to ‘the mother of abominations’ more than you are aware.”
(Page 118.) But let it be observed, the holding universal
redemption is no proof of this. For thousands of Papists,
yea, all the Dominican Friars, hold particular redemption.
“The moment in which saints depart from the body, they
are in the highest heavens. Here is no hint of any inter
mediate state. This is the Popish notion.” And the
Protestant too: It is the notion of many very eminent Divines
of our own Church. Bishop Smalridge, in particular, has
published a celebrated sermon upon it. “I am very sorry
your opinions are so much like the man of sin.” (Ibid.)
In this article they are not like at all; they are directly
opposite. For the Papists believe, even good men undergo a
painful purgatory after death. I believe there is no pain after
death, unless to those who perish for ever.
17. The grand charge remains: I am accused, Lastly, and
that over and over, in great variety of expressions, of being a
knave, a dishonest man, one of no truth, justice, or integrity.
(1.) The First proof of it is this: “We have Aspasio's
words; but in a patched and disfigured condition.” (Page20.)
The words I quoted are: “As sin and misery have abounded
through the First Adam, mercy and grace have much more
abounded through the Second; so that now none have reason
to complain.”
That Aspasio’s words are here abridged, is true; that they
are patched or disfigured, is not true, as every man of common
sense must see. So this is no proof of dishonesty.
(2.) See another: “Turn inward, and you will probably
discern more than a little disingenuity in your own procedure.”
(Page 83.)
Mr. Hervey said, “On Christ's death sinners are to rely as
the cause of their forgiveness; on Christ’s obedience, as the
ground of their acceptance.” I asked, “How does this agree
with page 58, where we read these words? ‘However I may
express myself, I would always have the obedience and the
death of Christ understood as a glorious aggregate, looking
upon all this as the foundation of my hope.’” I ask again,
How does the former sentence agrce with this?' And if a
344 PREFA CE. To
man think it agrees perfectly well, yet he has no ground to
charge me with disingenuity for thinking otherwise.
(3.) A Third proof is brought, page 37: “Theron calls
the terms inherent and imputed, nice distinctions, and meta
physical subtilties. Mr. Wesley makes Aspasio apply this
to the active and passive righteousness of Christ, whereas he
is treating of a subject totally different.”
Upon recurring to the “Dialogues,” I find this is true.
Here therefore is a breach of literary justice. But it was not
a designed one; as may appear from hence, that this was
originally sent to Mr. Hervey himself, and him only. Now,
had I been ever so dishonest, I should not have been so foolish,
had I been conscious of any dishonest dealing, as to appeal to
him, who of all others could not fail immediately to detect it.
(4.) A Fourth runs thus: “‘Barely to demonstrate his
sovereignty, is a principle of action fit for the great Turk, not
the most high God.” Such a fraudulent quotation I have not
seen, no, not in the Critical Reviewers. To mark the first
sentence with commas, and thereby assign it to me, is really
a masterpiece, especially when you have thrust in the word
barely, and lopped off the word grace.” (Page 284.)
In my Letter the whole paragraph is: “‘The grand end
which God proposes in all his favourable dispensations to
fallen man is, to demonstrate the sovereignty of his grace.’”
(Is the word barely thrust in here, or the word grace lopped
off? And could any one, who had eyes to read this, be deceived
by my citing afterward part of this sentence?) “Not so; to
impart happiness to his creatures is his grand end herein.
Barely ‘to demonstrate his sovereignty” is a principle of action
fit for the great Turk, not the most high God.”
You see, there needs only to correct the mistake of the
printer, who sets the commas on the wrong word, and this
“specimen too of my want of integrity” vanishes into nothing.
Suffer me to observe once more, (and let it be once for all,)
that the sending false quotations of a man’s book to himself,
and that while there was not the least design or thought of
publishing what was so sent, could never be a proof of want
of integrity, but of attention, or at most, of understanding.
(5.) But this will not avail in the following case: “Review a
passage of your book on Original Sin. Here you scruple not to
overleap the bounds of sincerity and truth. Aspasio had said,
‘As Adam was a public person, and acted in the stead of all
A TREATISE ON JUSTIFICATION. 345
mankind; so Christ was a public person, and acted in behalf of
all his people. As Adam was the first general representative
of this kind, Christ was the second and the last. Here you
substitute the word mankind instead of this kind. I at first
thought, it might be an inadvertency, or an error of the press,
till I looked to the bottom of the page, where I found the
following words inclosed within the marks of the same quota
tion:” (That is, the commas, which ought to have been set
five lines sooner, are set at the end of the paragraph:) “‘All
these expressions demonstrate, that Adam (as well as Christ)
was a representative of all mankind; and that what he did in
this capacity did not terminate in himself, but affected all
whom he represented. (Original Sin, page 268; Dialogues,
page 137.) Then I could no longer forbear crying out,
“There is treachery, O Ahaziah !’” (Page 278.)
Treacheryl Cui bono P “For what end?” Can any guess?
What was I to gain thereby? Of what possible advantage
could it be, either to me or to the cause I was defending?
What possible view could I have therein? And would I
cheat for cheating sake? I was not here talking either of
general or particular redemption. I purposely declined
entering into the question throughout that whole treatise.
Every candid man will therefore naturally suppose, that both
the misplacing the commas, and the putting mankind for this
kind, were the printer’s fault, not mine; a part of those
numerous errors of the press, which were occasioned by my
absence from it, and the inaccuracy of the corrector.
18. I will not tire either my reader or myself, by citing
any more passages of this kind; although the circumstances
are so plausibly related, and so strongly amplified, that, upon
the first reading of each, I was myself ready to cry out,
“Surely this must be true !” I hope the preceding specimen
may suffice, and prevent impartial men from judging rashly.
I shall add but one passage more; but it is a very extra
ordinary one; such as none can deny to be a home thrust, a
blow under the fifth rib :
“My dear Sir, let me give you a word of friendly advice.
Before you turn Turk, Deist, or Atheist, see that you first
become an honest man. They will all disown you, if you
go over to their party destitute of common honesty.” (Page
277.)
Upon what is this wonderful advice grounded? and this
346 REMARKS ON A DEFENCE
peremptory declaration, that, as I am now, even Turks and
Deists, yea, Atheists, would disown me? Why, upon the
printer's blunder,-putting mankind for this kind, and setting
the commas in the wrong place |
“And is this thy voice, my son David?” Is this thy tender,
loving, grateful spirit? No, “the hand of Joab is in all
this!” I acknowledge the hand, the heart, of William
Cudworth. I perceive, it was not an empty boast, (as I was
at first inclined to think,) which he uttered to Mr. Pearse,
at Bury, before my friend went to paradise,—“Mr. Hervey
has given me full power to put out and put in what I please.”
But he too is gone hence; and he knows now whether I
am an honest man or no. It cannot be long, even in the
course of nature, before I shall follow them.
My race of glory's run, and race of shame;
And I shall shortly be with them that rest.
I could wish till then to be at peace with all men; but the
will of the Lord be done ! Peace or war, ease or pain, life or
death, is good, so I may but “finish my course with joy, and
the ministry which I have received of the Lord Jesus to testify
the gospel of the grace of God.”
HoxTon-SQUARE,
Nov. 16, 1764.
SOME R EMA R KS
ON
“A DEFENCE OF THE PREFACE TO THE EDINBURGH
EDITION OF ASPASIO WINDICATED.”
EDINBURGH, May, 1766.
I HAVE neither time nor inclination to write a formal
answer to the Reverend Dr. Erskine's tract. My hope of
convincing him is lost; he has drunk in all the spirit of the
book he has published. But I owe it to God and his
children to say something for myself, when I am attacked in
OF ASPASIO VINDICATED. 347
so violent a manner, if haply some may take knowledge, that
I also endeavour to “live honestly, and to serve God.”
1. Dr. Erskine says, “An edition of these Letters has
been published in London, from the author's own manuscripts,
which puts the authenticity of them beyond doubt.” I
answer, This is a mistake; impartial men doubt of their
authenticity as much as ever. (I mean, not with regard to
the Letters in general, but to many particular passages.) And
that for two reasons: First, because those passages breathe
an acrimony and bitterness which Mr. Hervey in his life-time
never showed to any one, and least of all to one he was deeply
obliged to. Surely this is not what Dr. E. terms his
“scriptural and animated manner.” I hope it was not for
this cause that he pronounces this “equal, if not superior, to
any one of his controversial pieces published in his life-time.”
Indeed, I know of no controversial piece at all which he
published in his life-time. His “Dialogues” he no more
intended for such, than his “Meditations among the Tombs.”
A Second reason for doubting of their authenticity is, that he
told his brother, with his dying voice, (I have it under his
brother’s own hand,) “I desire my Letters may not be
published; because great part of them is written in a short
hand which none but myself can read.”
2. But the present question lies, not between me and Mr.
Hervey, but between Dr. E. and me. He vehemently attacks
me for saying, “Orthodoxy, or right opinion, is at best but
a very slender part of religion, if any part of it at all.” He
labours to deduce the most frightful consequences from it,
and cries, “If once men believe that right opinion is a slender
part of religion, if any part of religion, or no part at all,
there is scarce any thing so foolish, or so wicked, which Satan
may not prompt to.” (Page 6.) And what, if, after all, Dr.
E. himself believes the very same thing! I am much
mistaken if he does not. Let us now fairly make the trial.
I assert, (1.) That, in some cases, “right opinion is no
part of religion;” in other words, there may be right opinion
where there is no religion. I instance in the devil. Has he
not right opinions? Dr. E. must, perforce, say, Yes. Has
he religion? Dr. E. must say, No. Therefore, here right
opinion is no part of religion. Thus far, then, Dr. E. himself
believes as I do.
I assert, (2.) In some cases, “it is a slender part of religion.”
348 REMARKS ON A DEFENCE
Observe, I speak of right opinion, as contra-distinguished
both from right tempers and from right words and actions.
Of this, I say, “It is a slender part of religion.” And can
Dr. E. say otherwise? Surely, no; nor any man living,
unless he be brimful of the spirit of contradiction.
“Nay, but I affirm, right tempers cannot subsist without
right opinion: The love of God, for instance, cannot subsist
without a right opinion of him.” I have never said anything
to the contrary: But this is another question. Though right
tempers cannot subsist without right opinion, yet right
opinion may subsist without right tempers. There may be a
right opinion of God, without either love, or one right temper
toward him. Satan is a proof of it. All, therefore, that I
assert in this matter, Dr. E. must affirm too.
But does it hence follow, that “ignorance and error areas
friendly to virtue as just sentiments?” or, that any man may
“disbelieve the Bible with perfect innocence or safety?”
Does Dr. E. himself think I believe this? I take upon me
to say, he does not think so. But why does he talk as if he
did? “Because it is a clear consequence from your own
assertion.” I answer, (1) If it be, that consequence is as
chargeable on Dr. E. as on me; since he must, nolens volens,
assert the same thing, unless he will dispute through a stone
wall. (2.) This is no consequence at all: For, admitting
“right tempers cannot subsist without right opinions,” you
cannot infer, therefore, “right opinions cannot subsist without
right tempers.” Prove this by other mediums, if you can ;
but it will never be proved by this. However, until this is
done, I hope to hear no more of this thread-bare objection.
3. Dr. E. attacks me, Secondly, with equal vehemence, on
the head of justification. In various parts of his tract, he flatly
charges me with holding justification by works. In support
of this charge, he cites several sentences out of various
treatises, abridgments of which I have occasionally published
within these thirty years. As I have not those abridgments
by me now, I suppose the citations are fairly made; and that
they are exactly made, without any mistake, either designed
or undesigned. I will suppose, likewise, that some of these
expressions, gleaned up from several tracts, are indefensible.
And what is it which any unprejudiced person can infer from
this? Will any candid man judge of my sentiments, either
on this or any other head, from a few sentences of other men,
OF ASPASIO VINDICATED. 349
(though reprinted by me, , after premising, that I did not
approve of all their expressions,) or from my own avowed,
explicit declarations, repeated over and over? Yet this is
the way by which Dr. E. proves, that I hold justification by
works | He continually cites the words of those authors as
mine, telling his reader, “Mr. Wesley says thus and thus.”
I do not say so; and no man can prove it, unless by citing
my own words. I believe justification by faith alone, as
much as I believe there is a God. I declared this in a
sermon, preached before the University of Oxford, eight-and
twenty years ago. I declared it to all the world eighteen
years ago, in a sermon written expressly on the subject. I
have never varied from it, no, not an hair's breadth, from
1738 to this day. Is it not strange, then, that, at this time
of day, any one should face me down, (yea, and one who has
that very volume in his hands, wherein that sermon on
justification by faith is contained,) that I hold justification
by works? and that, truly, because there are some expressions
in some tracts written by other men, but reprinted by me
during a course of years, which seem, at least, to countenance
that doctrine ! Let it suffice, (and it will suffice for every
impartial man,) that I absolutely, once for all, renounce every
expression which contradicts that fundamental truth, We are
justified by faith alone.
“But you have published John Goodwin’s ‘Treatise on
Justification.’” I have so; but I have not undertaken to
defend every expression which occurs therein. Therefore,
none has a right to palm them upon the world as mine.
And yet I desire no one will condemn that treatise before he
has carefully read it over; and that seriously and carefully;
for it can hardly be understood by a slight and cursory
reading. And let whoever has read it declare, whether he
has not proved every article he asserts, not only by plain
express Scripture, but by the authority of the most eminent
Reformers. If Dr. E. thinks otherwise, let him confute him;
but let no man condemn what he cannot answer.
4. Dr. E. attacks me, Thirdly, on the head of Christian
perfection. It is not my design to enter into the merits of
the cause. I would only just observe, (1.) That the great
argument which Dr. E. brings against it is of no force;
and, (2.) That he misunderstands and misrepresents my
sentiments on the subject.
350 REMARKS ON A DEFENCE
First. His great argument against it is of no force. It runs
thus: “Paul’s contention with Barnabas is a strong argument
against the attainableness of perfection in this life.” (Page
4.1.) True, if we judge by the bare sound of the English
version. But Dr. E. reads the original: K2 sysvero Tapo:
vTuo;. It does not say that sharpness was on both sides.
It does not say that all or any part of it was on St. Paul's
side. Neither does the context prove that he was in any
fault at all. Indeed, “he thought it not good to take him
with them,” who had deserted them before. Now, certainly,
there was no blame in this; neither was there any in his sub
sequent behaviour. For when Barnabas also departed from it,
he went on still in the work. “He went through Syria and
Cilicia,” as he had proposed, “confirming the Churches.”
Secondly. He misunderstands and misrepresents my
sentiments on the subject. He says, “Mr. Wesley seems to
maintain, that sinless perfection is actually attained by every
one born of God.” (Page 39.)
I do not maintain this; I do not believe it. I believe
Christian perfection, or perfect love, (sinless perfection is an
expression which I do not use or contend for,) is not attained
by any of the children of God till they are what the Apostle
John terms fathers. And this I expressly declare in that
very sermon which Dr. E. so largely quotes.
5. Why Dr. E. should quarrel with me concerning natural
free-will, I cannot conceive, unless for quarrelling's sake.
For it is certain, on this head, if no other, we are precisely of
one mind. I believe that Adam, before his fall, had such
freedom of will, that he might choose either good or evil;
but that, since the fall, no child of man has a natural power
to choose anything that is truly good. Yet I know (and
who does not?) that man has still freedom of will in things
of an indifferent nature. Does not Dr. E. agree with me in
this? O why should we seek occasion of contention 1
6. That Michael Servetus was “one of the wildest Anti
trinitarians that ever appeared” is by no means clear. I
doubt of it, on the authority of Calvin himself, who certainly
was not prejudiced in his favour. For if Calvin does not
misquote his words, he was no Antitrinitarian at all. Calvin
himself gives a quotation from one of his letters, in which he
expressly declares, “I do believe the Father is God, the Son
is God, and the Holy Ghost is God. But I dare not use the
OF ASPASIO V INDICATED. 351
word Trinity or Person.” I dare, and I think them very
good words. But I should think it very hard to be burned
alive for not using them; especially with a slow fire, made of
moist, green wood |
I believe Calvin was a great instrument of God; and that
he was a wise and pious man: But I cannot but advise those
who love his memory to let Servetus alone. Yet if any one
resolves to understand the whole affair, he may see a circum
stantial account of it, published some years since, by Dr.
Chandler, an eminent Presbyterian Divine in London.
7. Of myself I shall speak a little by and by. But I
would now speak of the Methodists, so called, in general.
Concerning these, Dr. E. cites the following words, from a
little tract, published some years since:—*
“We look upon ourselves, not as the authors or ring-leaders
of a particular sect or party, but as messengers of God to those
who are Christians in name, but Heathens in heart and life,
to call them back to that from which they are fallen, to real,
genuine Christianity.—We look upon the Methodists, not as
any particular party, but as living witnesses, in and to every
party, of that Christianity which we preach.” (Page 3.)
On this Dr. E. remarks: “If the Methodist Teachers
confined themselves to preaching, there might be some room
for this plea; but hardly, when they form bands and
classes;” that is, when they advise those who are “recalled
to real Christianity,” to watch over each other, lest they fall
again into the nominal religion, or no religion, that surrounds
them. But how does this alter the case? What, if, being
jealous, “lest any” of their brethren should again “be
hardened through the deceitfulness of sin,” they should
“exhort one another,” not only weekly, but daily, to cleave
to God “with full purpose of heart 1.” Why might we not
plead still, that these are not to “be looked upon as any
particular party, but as living witnesses, in and to every
party, of that Christianity which we preach?”
What Dr. E. says of the mischievousness of this, and with
great plausibility, (page 27,) depends upon an entire mistake,
namely, that the Leader of a class acts just like a Romish
Priest; and that the inquiries made in a class are of the
same kind with those made in auricular confession. It all
therefore falls to the ground at once, when it is observed,
* “Advice to the People called Methodists.”
352 REMARKS ON A DEFENCE
that there is no resemblance at all, either between the
Leader and the Priest, or between the inquiries made by one
and by the other.
It is true, that the Leader “sees each person once a week,
to inquire how their souls prosper;” and that when they meet,
“the Leader or Teacher asks each a few questions relating to
the present situation of their minds.” So then, that questions
are actually asked, yea, and inquiries made, cannot be denied.
But what kind of questions or inquiries? None that expose
the answerer to any danger; none that they would scruple to
answer before Dr. E., or any other person that fears God.
8. “But you form a Church within a Church, whose mem
bers in South Britain profess to belong to the Church of
England, and those in North Britain to the Church of Scot
land; while yet they are inspected and governed by Teachers
who are sent, continued, or removed by Mr. W.” (Page 3.)
All this is, in a certain sense, very true. But let us see what
all this amounts to. “You form a Church within a Church;”
that is, you raise up and join together witnesses of real
Christianity, not among Mahometans and Pagans, but within
a Church by law established. Certainly so. And that Church,
if she knew her own interest, would see she is much obliged
to us for so doing. “But the Methodists in South Britain
profess to belong to the Church of England.” They profess
the truth: For they do belong to it; that is, all who did so
before the change was wrought, not in their external mode
of worship, but in their tempers and lives. “Nay, but those
in Scotland profess to belong to the Church of Scotland.”
And they likewise profess the truth: For they do belong to
it as they did before. And is there any harm in this?
“But they are still inspected by Mr. W. and his Preachers.”
And they think this both their duty and their privilege;
namely, to be still instructed, and built up in faith and love,
by those who were the instruments, in God’s hand, of bringing
them from dead, formal religion, to “righteousness, and peace,
and joy in the Holy Ghost.” But still those Teachers are so
careful, not to withdraw them from the Church to which they
belong, not to make any division, that they neither baptize,
nor administer the Lord's supper. If I were desirous to
form a separate party, I should do both without delay.
9. I come now to add a few words, without any preface or
ceremony, concerning myself:—
OF ASPASIO WINDICATED. 353
Dr. E. affirms, First, that I am a very knave; and,
Secondly, that I am in a state of damnation. As to the
First, he says, “Truth and honesty choose to enter openly
and undisguised. “He that entereth not by the door’ of a
plain, simple declaration of his sentiments, but insinuates
himself by concealing his opinions, ‘the same is a thief and a
robber.’” (Page 5.) We have more to the same purpose:
“Upon mature reflection, I saw no cause to flatter myself, that
I could procure from him satisfaction as to what offended me.
He had discovered himself no novice in the arts of subtlety
and disguise.” (Page 24.) Again: “I find little else than
that shifting at which Mr. W. is so singularly expert.” This is
as genteel as to say, “Sir, you lie;” and it is just as strong an
argument. It is indeed mere common-place, with which a man.
fond of such flowers may embellish his page on any occasion.
But what room is there for it on this occasion? By God’s
help, I will sift this matter thoroughly. And I trust no
gentleman or scholar, who weighs what I say, will throw this
dirt in my face any more.
For several years I was Moderator in the disputations
which were held six times a week at Lincoln College, in
Oxford. I could not avoid acquiring hereby some degree of
expertness in arguing; and especially in discerning and
pointing out well-covered and plausible fallacies. I have
since found abundant reason to praise God for giving me this
honest art. By this, when men have hedged me in by what
they called demonstrations, I have been many times able to
dash them in pieces; in spite of all its covers, to touch the
very point where the fallacy lay; and it flew open in a
moment. This is the art which I have used with Bishop
Warburton, as well as in the preceding pages. When Dr. E.
twisted truth and falsehood together, in many of his proposi
tions, it was by this art I untwisted the one from the other,
and showed just how far each was true. At doing this, I
bless God, I am expert; as those will find who attack me
without rhyme or reason. But “shifting, subtlety, and dis
guise,” I despise and abhor, fully as much as Dr. E. And if
he cannot see that I have answered Bishop Warburton
plainly and directly, and so untwisted his arguments that no
man living will be able to piece them together, I believe all
unprejudiced men can, and are thoroughly convinced of it.
Let any candid man review the last article, and he will see
VOL. X. A A
354 REMARKS ON A DEFENCE
another instance of this. Dr. E. had given us a long
paragraph about “forming a Church within a Church.” It
is to the same effect with the objection which the warm
Churchmen have often urged against the Dissenters in
England. It sounds extremely plausible, and the parts of it
are carefully knit together. But it is not a gordian knot: A
man moderately expert in arguing may untie it. And when
the threads are separate, it plainly appears to have been fine,
but not strong.
As to the Second point, I cannot at all complain of Dr.
E.’s want of openness. He speaks plain and downright:
“Seeming strictness of behaviour will not justify those who
forget, ‘There is a way which seemeth right unto a man;
but the end thereof is the way of death.” (Page 46.)
Again: “What claim can he have to genuine Christianity,
whose professed experience gives God the lie? “Say I these
things as a man, or saith not the law the same also ?’ It is
a deadly charity that flatters men with a persuasion that
they are in the way of life, whom the Scripture pronounces
in a way of destruction.”
Dr. E.'s charity is of another kind It is Mr. Sandi
man’s charity It reminds me of the charity of an
Antinomian in London; one, I mean, who was newly
recovered from that delusion: “Sir,” said she, “last week I
would not have been content to kill you, if I could not have
damned you too.” I pray God to deliver me from such
charity ! charity, cruel as the gravel
But what right have I to complain of Dr. E. ? He has no
obligation to me. My speaking of him everywhere as I have
done, was a point of justice, not of friendship. I had only
the desire, but not the power, of doing him any kindness. I
could not say to him, “Nevertheless thou owest me thine
own soul also.” I have it not under Dr. E.'s hand, as I have
under Mr. Hervey's, “Shall I call you my father, or my
friend? You have been both to me.” If those related to
me by so near, so tender, ties, thus furiously rise up against
me, how much more may a stranger,-one of another nation?
“O Absalom, my son, my son 1’’
POSTSCRIPT.
IN his twenty-first page, Dr. E. says, “How far Mr.
Wesley’s Letter was an answer to anything material in the
OF ASPASIO WINDICATED. 355
Preface, the reader will best judge by perusing it.” I have
annexed it here, that the reader may judge, whether it is not
an answer to one very material thing, namely, the charge of
“concealing my sentiments,” for which Dr. E. condemns me
in the keenest manner, and on which very account he makes
no scruple to pronounce me “a thief and a robber.” I need
only premise, that I wrote it not out of fear, (as perhaps Dr.
E. thought,) neither in guile; but merely out of love to him,
and concern for the cause of God. I desire no favour from
him or any opponent: Do me justice, and I ask no more.
EDINBURGH, April 24, 1765.
REv. SIR,
BETwEEN thirty and forty years I have had the world
upon me, speaking all manner of evil. And I expected no
less, as God had called me to testify that its deeds were evil.
But the children of God were not upon me; nor did I expect
they would. I rather hoped they would take knowledge,
that all my designs, and thought, and care, and labour, were
directed to this one point,—to advance the kingdom of
Christ upon earth. And so many of them did, however
differing from me both in opinions and modes of worship. I
have the pleasure to mention Dr. Doddridge, Dr. Watts, and
Mr. Wardrobe, in particular. How then was I surprised, as
well as concerned, that a child of the same Father, a servant
of the same Lord, a member of the same family, and (as to
the essence of it) a preacher of the same gospel, should,
without any provocation that I know of, declare open war
against me ! I was the more surprised, because you had
told me, some months since, that you would favour me with
a letter. And had this been done, I make no doubt but you
would have received full satisfaction. Instead of this, you
ushered into this part of the world one of the most bitter
libels that was ever written against me;—written by a dying
man, (so far as it was written by poor, well-meaning Mr.
Hervey,) with a trembling hand, just as he was tottering on
the margin of the grave. A great warrior resigned his
crown, because “there should be some interval,” he said,
“between fighting and death.” But Mr. Hervey, who had
been a man of peace all his life, began a war not six months
before he died. He drew his sword when he was just
putting off his body. He then fell on one to whom he had
2 A 2
356 REMARKS ON A DEFENCE
the deepest obligations, (as his own letters, which I have now
in my hands, testify,) on one who had never intentionally
wronged him, who had never spoken an unkind word of him,
or to him, and who loved him as his own child. O tell it
not in Gath! The good Mr. Hervey, (if these Letters were
his) died cursing his spiritual father.
And these Letters another good man, Mr. , has
introduced into Scotland, and warmly recommended. Why
have you done this? “Because you have concealed your
principles, which is palpable dishonesty.”
When I was first invited into Scotland, (about fourteen
years ago,) Mr. Whitefield told me, “You have no business
there; for your principles are so well known, that if you
spoke like an angel, none would hear you. And if they did,
you would have nothing to do but to dispute with one and
another from morning to night.”
I answered: “If God sends me, people will hear. And I
will give them no provocation to dispute; for I will
studiously avoid controverted points, and keep to the
fundamental truths of Christianity. And if any still begin
to dispute, they may; but I will not dispute with them.”
I came: Hundreds and thousands flocked to hear. But I
was enabled to keep my word. I avoided whatever might
engender strife, and insisted upon the grand points, –the
religion of the heart, and salvation by faith,-at all times,
and in all places. And by this means I have cut off all
occasion of dispute, from the first day to this very hour.
And this you amazingly improve into a fault; construe into a
proof of dishonesty. You likewise charge me with holding
unsound principles, and with saying, “Right opinions are
(sometimes) no part of religion.”
The last charge I have answered over and over, and very
lately to Bishop Warburton. Certainly, had you read that
single tract, you would never have repeated that stale
objection.
As to my principles, every one knows, or may know, that
I believe the Thirty-first Article of the Church of England.
But can none be saved who believe this? I know you will
not say so. Meantime, in the main point (justification by
faith) I have not wavered a moment for these seven-and
twenty years. And I allow all which Mr. Hervey himself
contends for, in his entrance upon the subject, —“Come to
OF ASPASIO WINDICATED. 357
Jesus as a needy beggar; hang upon him as a devoted
pensioner.” And whoever does this, I will be bold to say,
shall not perish everlastingly.
As to your main objection, convince me that it is my duty
to preach on controverted subjects, predestination in par
ticular, and I will do it. At present I think it would be a
sin. I think it would create still more divisions. And are
there not enough already? I have seen a book written by
one who styles himself, “Ecclesiae direptae et gementis
Presbyter.”* Shall I tear ecclesiam direptam et gementem?t
God forbid! No; I will, so far as I can, heal her breaches.
And if you really love her, (as I doubt not you do,) why
should you hinder me from so doing? Has she so many
friends and helpers left, that you should strive to lessen their
number? Would you wish to turn any of her friends, even
though weak and mistaken, into enemies? If you must
contend, have you not Arians, Socinians, Seceders, Infidels,
to contend with ; to say nothing of whoremongers, adulterers,
Sabbath-breakers, drunkards, common swearers? O ecclesia
gemens ! And will you pass by all these, and single out me
to fight with? Nay, but I will not. I do and will fight
with all these, but not with you. I cannot; I dare not.
You are the son of my Father; my fellow-labourer in the
gospel of his dear Son. I love your person; I love your
character; I love the work wherein you are engaged. And
if you will still shoot at me, (because Mr. Hervey has painted
me as a monster) even with arrows drawn from Bishop
Warburton’s quiver, (how unfit for Mr. 's hand!) I can
only say, as I always did before, The Lord Jesus bless you in
your soul, in your body, in your relations, in your work, in
whatever tends to his own glory !
I am,
Dear Sir,
Your affectionate brother,
JOHN WESLEY.
• A Presbyter of a pillaged and groaning Church.–EDIT.
+ This Church which is torn asunder and groaning.—EDIT.
THE QUESTION,
“WHAT IS AN ARMINIAN P”
ANSWERED.
BY A LOVER OF FREE GRACE.
1. To say, “This man is an Arminian,” has the same effect
on many hearers, as to say, “This is a mad dog.” It puts
them into a fright at once: They run away from him with all
speed and diligence; and will hardly stop, unless it be to
throw a stone at the dreadful and mischievous animal.
2. The more unintelligible the word is, the better it
answers the purpose. Those on whom it is fixed know not
what to do: Not understanding what it means, they cannot
tell what defence to make, or how to clear themselves from
the charge. And it is not easy to remove the prejudice which
others have imbibed, who know no more of it, than that it is
“something very bad,” if not “all that is bad!”.
3. To clear the meaning, therefore, of this ambiguous term,
may be of use to many: To those who so freely pin this name
upon others, that they may not say what they do not under
stand; to those that hear them, that they may be no longer
abused by men saying they know not what; and to those
upon whom the name is fixed, that they may know how to
answer for themselves.
4. It may be necessary to observe, First, that many con
found Arminians with Arians. But this is entirely a different
thing; the one has no resemblance to the other. An Arian
is one who denies the Godhead of Christ; we scarce need say,
the supreme, eternal Godhead; because there can be no God
but the supreme, eternal God, unless we will make two Gods,
a great God and a little one. Now, none have ever more
firmly believed, or more strongly asserted, the Godhead of
whAT Is AN ARMINIAN ? 359
Christ, than many of the (so called) Arminians have done;
yea, and do at this day. Arminianism therefore (whatever
it be) is totally different from Arianism.
5. The rise of the word was this: JAMEs HARMENs, in
Latin, Jacobus Arminius, was first one of the Ministers of
Amsterdam, and afterwards Professor of Divinity at Leyden.
He was educated at Geneva; but in the year 1591 began to
doubt of the principles which he had till then received. And
being more and more convinced that they were wrong, when
he was vested with the Professorship, he publicly taught
what he believed the truth, till, in the year 1609, he died in
peace. But a few years after his death, some zealous men.
with the Prince of Orange at their head, furiously assaulted
all that held what were called his opinions; and having pro
cured them to be solemnly condemned, in the famous Synod
of Dort, (not so numerous or learned, but full as impartial, as
the Council or Synod of Trent,) some were put to death,
some banished, some imprisoned for life, all turned out of
their employments, and made incapable of holding any office,
either in Church or State.
6. The errors charged upon these (usually termed Armi
nians) by their opponents, are five: (1) That they deny
original sin; (2.) That they deny justification by faith;
(3.) That they deny absolute predestination; (4.) That they
deny the grace of God to be irresistible; and, (5) That they
affirm, a believer may fall from grace.
With regard to the two first of these charges, they plead,
Not Guilty. They are entirely false. No man that ever
lived, not John Calvin himself, ever asserted either original
sin, or justification by faith, in more strong, more clear and
express terms, than Arminius has done. These two points,
therefore, are to be set out of the question: In these both
parties agree. In this respect, there is not a hair's breadth
difference between Mr. Wesley and Mr. Whitefield.
7. But there is an undeniable difference between the
Calvinists and Arminians, with regard to the three other
questions. Here they divide; the former believe absolute,
the latter only conditional, predestination. The Calvinists
hold, (1.) God has absolutely decreed, from all eternity, to
save such and such persons, and no others; and that Christ
died for these, and none else. The Arminians hold, God has
decreed, from all eternity, touching all that have the written
360 WHAT IS AN ARMINIAN ?
word, “He that believeth shall be saved: He that believeth
not, shall be condemned:” And in order to this, “Christ
died for all, all that were dead in trespasses and sins;” that
is, for every child of Adam, since “in Adam all died.”
8. The Calvinists hold, Secondly, that the saving grace of
God is absolutely irresistible; that no man is any more able to
resist it, than to resist the stroke of lightning. The Arminians
hold, that although there may be some moments wherein the
grace of God acts irresistibly, yet, in general, any man may
resist, and that to his eternal ruin, the grace whereby it was
the will of God he should have been eternally saved.
9. The Calvinists hold, Thirdly, that a true believer in
Christ cannot possibly fall from grace. The Arminians hold,
that a true believer may “make shipwreck of faith and a good
conscience;” that he may fall, not only foully, but finally, so
as to perish for ever.
10. Indeed, the two latter points, irresistible grace and
infallible perseverance, are the natural consequence of the
former, of the unconditional decree. For if God has eternally
and absolutely decreed to save such and such persons, it
follows, both that they cannot resist his saving grace, (else
they might miss of salvation,) and that they cannot finally
fall from that grace which they cannot resist. So that, in
effect, the three questions come into one, “Is predestination
absolute or conditional?” The Arminians believe, it is
conditional; the Calvinists, that it is absolute.
11. Away, then, with all ambiguity Away with all
expressions which only puzzle the cause! Let honest men
speak out, and not play with hard words which they do
not understand. And how can any man know what Arminius
held, who has never read one page of his writings? Let
no man bawl against Arminians, till he knows what the term
means; and then he will know that Arminians and Calvinists
are just upon a level. And Arminians have as much
right to be angry at Calvinists, as Calvinists have to be
angry at Arminians. John Calvin was a pious, learned,
sensible man; and so was James Harmens. Many Cal
vinists are pious, learned, sensible men; and so are many
Arminians. Only the former hold absolute predestination;
the latter, conditional.
12. One word more: Is it not the duty of every Arminian
Preacher, First, never, in public or in private, to use the word
THoUGHTs UPoN God’s sovKREIGNTY. 36]
Calvinist as a term of reproach; seeing it is neither better
nor worse than calling names?—a practice no more
consistent with good sense or good manners, than it is with
Christianity. Secondly. To do all that in him lies to prevent
his hearers from doing it, by showing them the sin and folly
of it? And is it not equally the duty of every Calvinist
Preacher, First, never in public or in private, in preaching
or in conversation, to use the word Arminian as a term of
reproach? Secondly. To do all that in him lies to prevent
his hearers from doing it, by showing them the sin and folly
thereof; and that the more earnestly and diligently, if they
have been accustomed so to do? perhaps encouraged therein
by his own example !
THOUGHTS UPON GOD’S SOWEREIGNTY.
GoD reveals himself under a two-fold character; as a
Creator, and as Governor. . These are no way inconsistent
with each other; but they are totally different.
As a Creator, he has acted, in all things, according to his
own sovereign will. Justice has not, cannot have, any place
here; for nothing is due to what has no being. Here,
therefore, he may, in the most absolute sense, do what, he
will with his own. Accordingly, he created the heavens and
the earth, and all things that are therein, in every conceivable
respect, “according to his own good pleasure.” 1. He
began his creation at what time, or rather, at what part of
eternity, it seemed him good. Had it pleased him, it might
have been millions of years sooner, or millions of ages later.
2. He determined, by his sovereign will, the duration of the
universe; whether it should last seven thousand, or seven
hundred thousand, or numberless millions of years. 3. By
the same, he appointed the place of the universe, in the
immensity of space. 4. Of his sovereign will he determined
the number of the stars, of all the component parts of the
universe, and the magnitude of every atom, of every fixed
star, every planet, and every comet. 5. As Sovereign, he
362 THouGHTs UPoN GoD's sover EIGNTY.
created the earth, with all the furniture of it, whether
animate or inanimate; and gave to each such a nature, with
such properties. 6. Of his own good pleasure, he made such
a creature as man, an embodied spirit, and, in consequence
of his spiritual nature, endued with understanding, will, and
liberty. 7. He hath determined the times for every nation
to come into being, with the bounds of their habitation.
8. He has allotted the time, the place, the circumstances, for
the birth of each individual:—
If of parents I came
That honour'd thy name,
'Twas thy goodness appointed it so.
9. He has given to each a body, as it pleased him, weak or
strong, healthy or sickly. This implies, 10. That he gives
them various degrees of understanding, and of knowledge,
diversified by numberless circumstances. It is hard to say
how far this extends; what an amazing difference there is, as
to the means of improvement, between one born and brought
up in a pious English family, and one born and bred among
the Hottentots. Only we are sure the difference cannot be
so great, as to necessitate one to be good, or the other to be
evil; to force one into everlasting glory, or the other into
everlasting burnings. This cannot be, because it would
suppose the character of God as a Creator, to interfere with
God as a Governor; wherein he does not, cannot possibly,
act according to his own mere sovereign will; but, as he has
expressly told us, according to the invariable rules both of
justice and mercy.
Whether therefore we can account for it or no, (which
indeed we cannot in a thousand cases,) we must absolutely
maintain, that God is a rewarder of them that diligently
seek him. But he cannot reward the sun for shining,
because the sun is not a free agent. Neither could he
reward us, for letting our light shine before men, if we acted
as necessarily as the sun. All reward, as well as all punish
ment, pre-supposes free-agency; and whatever creature is
incapable of choice, is incapable of either one or the other.
Whenever, therefore, God acts as a Governor, as a
rewarder, or punisher, he no longer acts as a mere Sovereign,
by his own sole will and pleasure; but as an impartial Judge,
guided in all things by invariable justice.
THouGHTs UPoN God’s soverEIGNTY. 363
Yet it is true, that, in some cases, mercy rejoices over
justice; although severity never does. God may reward
more, but he will never punish more, than strict justice
requires. It may be allowed that God acts as Sovereign in
convincing some souls of sin; arresting them in their mid
career, by his resistless power. It seems also, that, at the
moment of our conversion, he acts irresistibly. There may
likewise be many irresistible touches during the course of
our Christian warfare; with regard to which every believer
Tinay Sa
y say, “In the time of my distress
Thou hast my succour been,
In my utter helplessness
Restraining me from sin.”
But still, as St. Paul might have been either obedient or
“disobedient to the heavenly vision,” so every individual
may, after all that God has done, either improve his grace,
or make it of none effect.
Whatever, therefore, it hath pleased God to do, of his
sovereign pleasure, as Creator of heaven and earth; and
whatever his mercy may do on particular occasions, over and
above what justice requires; the general rule stands firm as
the pillars of heaven: “The Judge of all the earth will do
right. He will judge the world in righteousness,” and every
man therein, according to the strictest justice. He will
punish no man for doing anything which he could not
possibly avoid; neither for omitting anything which he could
not possibly do. Every punishment supposes the offender
might have avoided the offence for which he is punished:
Otherwise, to punish him would be palpably unjust, and
inconsistent with the character of God our Governor.
Let then these two ideas of God the Creator, the sovereign
Creator, and God the Governor, the just Governor, be always
kept apart. Let us distinguish them from each other, with
the utmost care. So shall we give God the full glory of his
sovereign grace, without impeaching his inviolable justice.
A BLOW AT THE ROOT;
OR,
CHRIST STABBED IN THE HOUSE OF HIS FRIENDS,
Judas, betrayest thou the Son of Man with a kiss P-Luke xxii. 48.
1. “WITHoUT holiness no man shall see the Lord,” shall
see the face of God in glory. Nothing under heaven can be
more sure than this; “for the mouth of the Lord hath
spoken it. And though heaven and earth pass away, yet his
word shall not pass away.” As well therefore might God
fall from heaven, as his word fall to the ground. No, it
cannot be; none shall live with God, but he that now lives
to God; none shall enjoy the glory of God in heaven, but he
that bears the image of God on earth; none that is not saved
from sin here can be saved from hell hereafter; none can see
the kingdom of God above, unless the kingdom of God be in
him below. Whosoever will reign with Christ in heaven,
must have Christ reigning in him on earth. He must have
“that mind in him which was in Christ,” enabling him “to
walk as Christ also walked.”
2. And yet as sure as this is, and as clearly as it is taught
in every part of the Holy Scripture, there is scarce one
among all the truths of God, which is less received by men.
It was indeed acknowledged in some degree, even among the
wiser Heathens. Some among them allowed, that nothing
would please God, but the sancti recessus mentis, et incoctum
generoso pectus honesto; “a virtuous, holy mind, and an heart
deep-dyed with generous honesty.” But though they could
not deny, yet how easily and effectually did they evade this!
They fancied something else would do as well; that some
rites or ceremonies, some external forms, or glorious actions,
would supply the place of inward holiness. So the famous
A BLOW AT THE ROOT. 365
Roman entitles to future happiness, not only the good and
virtuous, but all
Ob patriam pugnando vulnera passos,
Quique pii vates, et Phaebo digna locuti;
Inventas aut qui vitam excoluere per artes.*
So, to fight for their country, to write good verses, or to
invent useful arts, was abundantly sufficient, in the judgment
of the wisest Heathens, to give men a place in heaven |
3. But this would not pass with modern Romans. They
despised such gross imaginations. But though they did not
allow these, they found out another way to get to heaven
without holiness. In the room of them they substituted
penances, pilgrimages, praying to saints and angels; and,
above all these, masses for the dead, absolution by a Priest,
and extreme unction. And these satisfy the Romanists full as
well as lustrations did the Heathens. Thousands of them
make no manner of doubt, but, by a diligent use of these,
without any holiness at all, they shall see the Lord in glory.
4. However, Protestants will not be satisfied thus; they
know this hope is no better than a spider's web. They are
convinced, that whoever leans on this, leans on the staff of a
broken reed. What then can they do? How shall they
hope to see God, without holiness? Why, by doing no harm,
doing good, going to the church and sacrament. And many
thousands sit down content with this, believing they are in
the high road to heaven.
5. Yet many cannot rest here. They look upon this as the
very Popery of Protestantism. They well know, that although
none can be a real Christian, without carefully abstaining from
all evil, using every means of grace at every opportunity, and
doing all possible good to all men; yet a man may go thus far,
may do all this, and be but an Heathen still. They know this
religion is too superficial; it is but as it were skin-deep. There
fore, it is not Christianity; for that lies in the heart; it is wor
shipping God in spirit and in truth; it is no other than “the
* The following is Pitt's translation of these lines from Virgil:—
“Patriots who perish'd for their country's right,
Or nobly triumph'd in the field of fight:
There holy priests and sacred poets stood,
Who sung with all the raptures of a god;
Worthies who life by useful arts refined,
With those who leave a deathless name behind,
Friends of the world, and fathers of mankind.”-EDIT.
/
366 A BLOW AT THE ROOT.
kingdom of God within us;” it is the life of God in the soul
of man; it is the mind which was in Christ Jesus; it is
“righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost.”
6. Besides, they see that, be this religion shallower or deeper,
it does not stand on the right foundation; since “other
foundation” for true religion “can no man lay, than that
which is laid, even Christ Jesus;” since no one can have the
mind which was in Christ, till he is justified by his blood, till
he is forgiven and reconciled to God through the redemption
that is in Jesus Christ. And none can be justified, they are
well assured, but by faith, even faith alone; seeing “to him”
only “that believeth on God who justifieth the ungodly, his
faith is counted to him for righteousness.”
7. What evasion now? What way could Satan take to make
all this light of none effect? What could be done when that
grand truth, “By grace ye are saved through faith,” was more
and more generally received? What, indeed, but to persuade
the very men who had received it, to “turn the grace of God
into lasciviousness?” To this end Simon Magus appeared
again, and taught, “that Christ had done, as well as suffered,
all; that his righteousness being imputed to us, we need
none of our own; that seeing there was so much righteousness
and holiness in Him, there needs none in us; that to think
we have any, or to desire or seek any, is to renounce Christ;
that from the beginning to the end of salvation, all is in
Christ, nothing in man; and that those who teach otherwise
are legal Preachers, and know nothing of the gospel.”
8. This is indeed “a blow at the root,” the root of all
holiness, all true religion. Hereby Christ is “stabbed in the
house of his friends,” of those who make the largest professions
of loving and honouring him; the whole design of his death,
namely, “to destroy the works of the devil,” being over
thrown at a stroke. For wherever this doctrine is cordially
received, it leaves no place for holiness. It demolishes it
from top to bottom; it destroys both root and branch. It
effectually tears up all desire of it, all endeavour after it.
It forbids all such exhortations as might excite those desires,
or awaken those endeavours. Nay, it makes men afraid of
personal holiness, afraid of cherishing any thought of it, or
motion toward it, lest they should deny the faith, and reject
Christ and his righteousness: So that, instead of being
“zealous of good works,” they are a stink in their nostrils.
A BLOW AT THE ROOT. 367
And they are infinitely more afraid of “the works of God,”
than of “the works of the devil.”
9. Here is wisdom | though not the wisdom of the saints,
but wisdom from beneath. Here is the masterpiece of
Satan': Farther than this he cannot go. Men are holy,
without a grain of holiness in them holy in Christ, however
unholy in themselves; they are in Christ, without one jot of
the mind that was in Christ; in Christ, though their nature
is whole in them. They are “complete in him,” though
they are, in themselves, as proud, as vain, as covetous, as
passionate as ever. It is enough : They may be unrighteous
still, seeing Christ has “fulfilled all righteousness.”
10. “O ye simple ones, how long will ye love simplicity?”
How long will ye “seek death in the error of your life?”
“Know ye not,” whoever teacheth you otherwise, “that
the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God?”
“Be not deceived; ” although there are many lie in wait to
deceive, and that under the fair pretence of exalting Christ;
—a pretence which the more easily steals upon you, because
“to you he is precious.” But as the Lord liveth, “neither
fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor
sodomites, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor
revilers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of God.”
“Such” indeed “were some of you. But ye are washed, but
ye are sanctified,” as well as “justified, in the name of the
Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God.” You are really
changed; you are not only accounted, but actually “made,
righteous.” “The law”—the inward power—“of the Spirit
of life in Christ Jesus hath made” you “free”—really, actually
free—“from the law” or power “of sin and death.” This is
liberty, true gospel liberty, experienced by every believer:
Not freedom from the law of God, or the works of God, but
from the law of sin and the works of the devil. See that ye
“stand fast in” this real, not imaginary “liberty, wherewith
Christ hath made you free.” And take heed ye “be not
entangled again,” by means of these vain boasters, “in the
yoke of ’’ that vile “bondage to sin,” from which ye are now
clean escaped. I testify unto you, that if you still continue
in sin, Christ shall profit you nothing; that Christ is no
Saviour to you, unless he saves you from your sins; and that
unless it purify your heart, faith shall profit you nothing. O
when will ye understand, that to oppose either inward or out
368 A BLoW AT THE ROOT.
ward holiness, under colour of exalting Christ, is directly to
act the part of Judas, to “betray the Son of man with a kiss?”
Repent, repent! lest he cut you in sunder with the two-edged
sword that cometh out of his mouth ! It is you yourselves
that, by opposing the very end of his coming into the world,
are crucifying the Son of God afresh, and putting him to an
open shame. It is you that, by expecting to see the Lord
without holiness, through the righteousness of Christ, “make
the blood of the covenant an unholy thing,” keeping those
unholy that so trust in it. O beware ! for evil is before you.
If those who name not the name of Christ, and die in their
sins, shall be punished seven-fold, surely you who thus make
Christ a minister of sin, shall be punished seventy-and-seven
fold. What; make Christ destroy his own kingdom? make
Christ a factor for Satan? set Christ against holiness? talk of
Christ as saving his people in their sins? It is no better than
to say, He saves them from the guilt, and not from the power,
of sin. Will you make the righteousness of Christ such a cover
for the unrighteousness of man? So that by this means, “the
unrighteous” of every kind “shall inherit the kingdom of God!”
Stop! Consider! What are you doing? You did run well: Who
hath bewitched you? Who hath corrupted you from the sim
plicity of Christ, from the purity of the gospel? You did know,
“He that believeth is born of God: And whosoever is born
of God sinneth not;” but while “he keepeth himself, that
wicked one toucheth him not.” O come back to the true,
the pure, the old gospel ! that which ye received in the begin
ning. Come back to Christ, who died to make you an holy
people, “zealous of good works.” “Remember from whence
you are fallen, and repent, and do the first works.” Your
“Father worketh hitherto:” Doye work; else your faith is vain.
For “wilt thou know, O vain,” O empty “man, that faith
without works is dead?” Wilt thou know that “though I have
all faith, so as to remove mountains, and have not love, I am
nothing?” Wilt thou know, that all the blood and righteous
ness of Christ, unless “that mind be in thee which was in
Him,” and thou likewise “walk as Christ walked,” will only
increase thy damnation? “If any man teach otherwise, and
consent not to wholesome words, and to the doctrine which is
according to godliness, he is proud, knowing nothing, but
doting about strife of words, whereof come railings, evil sur
misings, perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds, and des
A BLOW AT THE ROOT. 369
titute of the truth.” Be no longer afraid of the strongest
exhortations either to inward or outward holiness. Hereby
God the Father is glorified, and God the Son truly exalted.
Do not stupidly and senselessly call this legal,—a silly, unmean
ing word. Be not afraid of being “under the law of God,” but
of being under “the law of sin.” Love the strictest preaching
best; that which most searches the heart, and shows you wherein
you are unlike Christ; and that which presses you most to love
him with all your heart, and serve him with all your strength.
11. Suffer me to warn you of another silly, unmeaning
word: Do not say, “I can do nothing.” If so, then you know
nothing of Christ; then you have no faith: For if you have,
if you believe, then you “can do all things through Christ
who strengtheneth you.” You can love him and keep his
commandments; and to you his “commandments are not
grievous.” Grievous to them that believe / Far from it. They
are the joy of your heart. Show then your love to Christ by
keeping his commandments, by walking in all his ordinances
blameless. Honour Christ by obeying him with all your
might, by serving him with all your strength. Glorify Christ
by imitating Christ in all things, by walking as he walked.
Keep to Christ by keeping in all his ways. Trust in Christ,
to live and reign in your heart. Have confidence in Christ
that he will fulfil in you all his great and precious promises,
that he will work in you all the good pleasure of his goodness,
and all the work of faith with power. Cleave to Christ, till
his blood have cleansed you from all pride, all anger, all
evil desire. Let Christ do all. Let him that has done all
for you, do all in you. Exalt Christ as a Prince to give
repentance; a Saviour both to give remission of sins, and to
create in you a new heart, to renew a right spirit within you.
This is the gospel, the pure, genuine gospel; glad tidings of
great salvation. Not the new, but the old, the everlasting
gospel, the gospel not of Simon Magus, but of Jesus Christ.
The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ give you,
“according to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened with
might by his Spirit in the inner man, that Christ may dwell
in your hearts by faith; that, being rooted and grounded in
love, ye may be able to comprehend with all saints, what is the
length, and breadth, and depth, and height; and to know
that love of Christ which passeth knowledge, that ye may be
filled with all the fulness of God!”
VOL. X. B R
THE CONSEQUENCE PROWE D.
1. MR. ToPLADY, a young, bold man, lately published
a pamphlet, an extract from which was soon after printed,
concluding with these words:
“The sum of all is this: One in twenty, suppose, of
mankind are elected; nineteen in twenty are reprobated.
The elect shall be saved, do what they will: The reprobate
shall be damned, do what they can.”
2. A great outcry has been raised on that account, as
though this was not a fair state of the case; and it has been
vehemently affirmed, that no such consequence follows from
the doctrine of absolute predestination.
I calmly affirm, it is a fair state of the case; this conse
quence does naturally and necessarily follow from the doctrine
of absolute predestination, as here stated and defended by
bold Mr. Augustus Toplady.
Indeed, I have not leisure to consider the matter at large:
I can only make a few strictures, and leave the young man
to be farther corrected by one that is full his match, Mr.
Thomas Olivers.
3. “When love is predicated of God, it implies, (1.) His
everlasting will, purpose, and determination to save his
people.” (Mr. Toplady’s Tract, chap. 1.) I appeal to all
men, whether it is not a natural consequence, even of this,
that “all these shall be saved, do what they will.”
You may say, “O, but they will only do what is good.”
Be it so: Yet the consequence stands.
“Election signifies that sovereign, unconditional, immu
table act of God, whereby he selected some to be eternally
saved.” Immutable, unconditional / From hence then it
undeniably follows, “these shall be saved, do what they will.”
“Predestination, as relating to the elect, is that irreversible
act of the divine will, whereby God determined to deliver a
certain number of men from hell:” Ergo, a certain number
shall infallibly be saved, do what they will. Who can deny
the consequence?
THE CONSEQUENCE PROVED. 371
“Not one of the elect can perish, but they must all
necessarily be saved.” (Chap. 3.) Can any assert this, and
yet deny that consequence,—“therefore all the elect shall be
saved, do what they will?” unless you would say, it is the
proposition itself, rather than a consequence from it.
4. So much for the former part of the question: Let us
now consider the latter:—
“Hatred ascribed to God implies a resolution not to have
mercy on such and such men. So, “Esau have I hated;’ that
is, I did from all eternity determine not to have mercy on
him.” (Chap. 1.) In other words,—
I by my dire decree did seal
His fix'd, unalterable doom;
Consign'd his unborn soul to hell,
And damn'd him from his mother's womb.
Well, then, does it not follow, by unavoidable consequence,
that such and such men, poor hated Esau in particular,
“shall be damned, do what they can 7”
“Reprobation denotes God’s eternal preterition of some
men, and his predestination of them to destruction.” And
is it possible for them, by anything they can do, to prevent
that destruction? You say, “No.” It follows, they “shall
be damned, do what they can.”
“Predestination, as it regards the reprobate, is that immut
able act of God’s will, whereby he hath determined to leave
some men to perish.” And can they avoid it by anything
they do? You affirm, they cannot. Again, therefore, it
follows, these “shall be damned, do what they can.”
“We assert, there is a predestination of particular persons
to death, which death they shall inevitably undergo;” that
is, “they shall be damned, do what they can.”
“The non-elect were predestinated to eternal death.”
(Chap. 2.) Ergo, “they shall be damned, do what they can.”
“The condemnation of the reprobate is necessary and
inevitable.” Surely I need add no more on this head. You
see that, “The reprobate shall be damned, do what they can,”
is the whole burden of the song.
5. Take only two precious sentences more, which include
the whole question :
“We assert, that the number of the elect, and also of the
reprobate, is so fixed and determinate, that neither can be
augmented or diminished;” (chap. 4;) and “that the
2 B 2
372 THE CONSEQUENCE PROVED.
decrees of election and reprobation are immutable and
irreversible.”
From each of these assertions, the whole consequence
follows, clear as the noonday sun,—Therefore, “the elect
shall be saved, do what they will; the reprobate shall be
damned, do what they can.”
6. I add a word, with regard to another branch of this
kind, charitable doctrine.
Mr. Toplady says, “God has a positive will to destroy the
reprobate for their sins.” (Chap. 1.) For their sins ! How
can that be? I positively assert, that (on this scheme) they
have no sins at all. They never had; they can have none.
For it cannot be a sin in a spark to rise, or in a stone to fall.
And the spark or the stone is not more necessarily determined
either to rise or to fall, than the man is to sin, to commit that
rape, or adultery, or murder. For “God did, before all
time, determine and direct to some particular end, every
person or thing, to which he has given, or is yet to give,
being.” God himself did “predestinate them to fill up the
measure of their iniquities;” such was his sovereign, irresist
ible decree, before the foundation of the world. To fill up
the measure of their iniquities; that is, to commit every act
which they committed. So “God decreed the Jews to be the
crucifiers of Christ, and Judas to betray him.” (Chap. 4.)
Whose fault was it then? You plainly say, It was not his
fault, but God's. For what was Judas, or ten thousand repro
bates besides? Could they resist his decree? No more than
they could pull the sun out of the firmament of heaven.
And would God punish them with everlasting destruction, for
not pulling the sun out of the firmament? He might as well
do it for this, as for their not doing what (on this supposition)
was equally impossible. “But they are punished for their
impenitency, sin, and unbelief.” Say unbelief and impeni
tency, but not sin. For “God had predestinated them to
continue in impenitency and unbelief God had positively
ordained them to continue in their blindness and hardness of
heart.” Therefore their not repenting and believing was no
more a sin, than their not pulling the sun from heaven.
7. Indeed Mr. T. himself owns, “The sins of the repro
bate were not the cause of their being passed by ; but merely
and entirely the sovereign will and determinating pleasure
of God.”
THE CONSEQUENCE PROVED. 373
“O, but their sin was the cause of their damnation
though not of their preterition;” that is, God determined
they should live and die in their sins, that he might after
wards damn them !
Was ever anything like this? Yes, I have read something
like it: When Tiberius had determined to destroy Sejanus
and all his family, as it was unlawful to put a virgin to death,
what could be done with his daughter, a child of nine years
old? Why, the hangman was ordered first to deflour, and
then to strangle, her ! Yet even good Tiberius did not order
her to be strangled “because she had been defloured!” If
so, it had been a parallel case; it had been just what is here
affirmed of the Most High.
8. One word more: “I will obviate,” says Mr. T., “a
fallacious objection, How is reprobation reconcilable with the
doctrine of a future judgment? There needs no pains to
reconcile these two.” No pains ! Indeed there does; more
pains than all the men upon earth, or all the devils in hell,
will ever be able to take. But go on: “In the last day,
Christ will pass sentence on the non-elect, (1.) Not for
having done what they could not help; but, (2.) For their
wilful ignorance of divine things; (3.) For their obstinate
unbelief; (4.) For their omissions of moral duty; and,
(5.) For their repeated iniquities and transgressions.”
He will condemn them, (1) “Not for having done what
they could not help.” I say, Yes; for having sinned against
God to their lives’ end. But this they could not help. He
had himself decreed it; he had determined they should
continue impenitent. (2) “For their wilful ignorance of
divine things.” No; their ignorance of God, and the things
of God, was not wilful, was not originally owing to their own
will, but to the sovereign will of God; his will, not theirs,
was the primary cause of their continuing in that ignorance.
(3) “For their obstinate unbelief.” No; how can it be
termed obstinate, when they never had a possibility of
removing it? when God had absolutely decreed, before they
were born, that they should live and die therein? (4.) “For
their omissions of moral duty;” that is, for not loving God
and their neighbour, which is the sum of the moral law.
Was it then ever in their power to love God and their
neighbour? No; no more than to touch heaven with their
hand. Had not God himself unalterably decreed, that they
374, REMARKS ON
should not love either God or man? If, therefore, they are
condemned for this, they are condemned for what they never
could help. (5.) “For their repeated iniquities and trans
gressions.” And was it ever in their power to help these?
Were they not predestinated thereto before the foundation of
the world? How then can the Judge of all the earth
consign them to everlasting fire, for what was in effect his
own act and deed?
I apprehend, then, this is no fallacious objection, but a
solid and weighty one; and defy any man living, who asserts
the unconditional decree of reprobation or preterition, (just
the same in effect,) to reconcile this with the scriptural
doctrine of a future judgment. I say again, I defy any man
on earth to show, how, on this scheme, God can “judge the
world in righteousness.”
SOME REMA R KS
ON
MR. HILL’S “REVIEW OF ALL THE DOCTRINES
TAUGHT BY MR. JOHN WESLEY.”
Humanum est nescire et errare.
Be calm in arguing; for fierceness makes
Error a fault, and truth discourtesy.
Why should I feel another man's mistakes
More than his sickness or infirmity?
In love I should ; but anger is not love,
Nor wisdom neither; therefore gently move.
HERBERT.
1. M.R. HILL has an immense advantage over me: He
abounds in time, and I in business. I cannot therefore
undertake to write page for page; I have not leisure, if I had
inclination. And indeed it is not needful: For a full con
futation of whatsoever is cited from the Eleven Letters
commonly ascribed to Mr. Hervey, I need only refer to Mr.
Sellon; who has not only answered every shadow of an argu
MR. HILL’s REVIEW. 375
ment contained in that poor piece of low invective, but even
the reproaches; which indeed he could not pass over, without
passing over great part of the book. If Mr. H. is afraid to
read that answer, I am sorry for it. And for whatever he
advances on particular redemption, or any of the points
connected therewith, I refer everyone who is not afraid of the
light, to those three tracts of Mr. Sellon,—“The Arguments
against General Redemption answered,” “God’s Sovereignty
vindicated against Elisha Coles,” and “The Church of
England vindicated from the Charge of Calvinism.” I
believe, if Mr. Hill had given this last a fair reading, he would
know the Seventeenth Article is nothing to his purpose.
2. With regard to his objections to Mr. Fletcher, I refer
all candid men to his own writings; his Letters, entitled,
“A First, Second, and Third Check to Antinomianism;” the
rather, because there are very few of his arguments which
Mr. H. even attempts to answer. It is true, he promises “a
full and particular answer to Mr. F.'s ‘Second Check to
Antinomianism.’” But it will puzzle anyone to find where
that answer is, except in the title-page. And if anything
more is needful to be done, Mr. F. is still able to answer for
himself. But if he does, I would recommend to his
consideration the advice formerly given by a wise man to his
friend: “See that you humble not yourself to that man; it
would hurt both him and the cause of God.” It is pity but
he had considered it sooner, and he might have escaped some
keen reflections. But he did not; he imagined, when he
spoke or wrote in the simplicity of his heart, that his
opponents would have received his words in the same spirit
wherein they were spoken. No such matter; they turn
them all into poison; he not only loses his sweet words, but
they are turned into bitterness, are interpreted as mere sneer
and sarcasm | A good lesson for me ! I had designed to
have transcribed Mr. F.'s character of Mr. H., and to have
added a little thereto, in hope of softening his spirit: But I
see it is in vain; as well might one hope to soften
Inexorable Pluto, king of shades !
Since he is capable of putting such a construction, even upon
Mr. F.’s gentleness and mildness; since he ascribes even to
him “a pen dipped in gall,” what will he not ascribe to me?
I have done, therefore, with humbling myself to these men,
376 REMARKS ON
to Mr. H. and his associates. I have humbled myself to them
for these thirty years; but will do it no more. I have done
with attempting to soften their spirits; it is all lost labour.
Upon men of an ingenuous temper I have been able to fix an
obligation. Bishop Gibson, Dr. Church, and even Dr. Taylor,
were obliged to me for not pushing my advantage. But it is
not so with these: Whatever mercy you show, you are to
expect no mercy from them. Mercy did I say? Alas! I
expect no justice; no more than I have found already. As
they have wrested and distorted my words from the beginning,
so I expect they will do to the end. Mr. H.’s performance
is a specimen. Such mercy, such justice, I am to expect
3. And does Mr. H. complain of the unhappy spirit in
which Mr. F. writes? Many writers have done marvellously;
but thou excellest them all ! For forty or fifty years I have
been a little acquainted with controversial writers; some of
the Romish persuasion, some of our own Church, some Dis
senters of various denominations: And I have found many
among them as angry as him; but one so bitter I have not
found: Or one only, the author of those “excellent Letters,”
as Mr. H. styles them; which he particularly “admires,”
(that is his word,) and the “whole spirit” of which he has
drank in. This is his peculiar character, his distinguishing
grace: As a writer, his name is Wormwood. Accordingly, he
charges Mr. F. with a “severe, acrimonious spirit,” with
“sneer, sarcasm, and banter,” yea, with “notorious falsehoods,
calumny, and gross perversions.” (Page 2.) Nay, “I accuse
you,” says he, “of the grossest perversions and misrepresenta
tions that ever proceeded from any author's pen.” In the
same spirit he is represented as “a slanderer of God’s people
and Ministers, descending to the meanest quibbles, with a
bitter, railing, acrimonious spirit;” (page 21;) and, page 27,
to go no farther, as “using stratagem and ungenerous
artifices:” Although “I have treated you,” says Mr. H.,
“with all the politeness of a gentleman, and the humility of a
Christian.” Amazing! And has he not treated me so too?
At present, take but one or two instances: “Forgeries have
long passed for no crime with Mr. Wesley.” (Page 27.) “He
administers falsehoods and damnable heresies, rank poison,
hemlock, and ratsbane. We cannot allow him any other title
than that of an empiric or quack-doctor.” (Page 29.) Which
shall we admire most here,—the gentleman or the Christian?
MR. HILL's REVIEw. 377
4. There is something extremely odd in this whole affair.
A man falls upon another, and gives him a good beating; who,
in order to be revenged, does not grapple with him, (perhaps
sensible that he is above his match,) but, giving him two or
three kicks, falls upon a third man that was standing by.
“O,” says he, “but I know that fellow well; he is the second
of him that beat me.”—“If he is, dispatch your business with
the former first, and then turn to him.” However, if Mr. H. is
resolved to fall upon me, I must defend myself as well as I can.
5. From the spirit and manner wherein he writes, let us
now proceed to the matter. But that is so various, and
scattered up and down for an hundred and fifty pages, without
much order or connexion, that it is difficult to know where
to begin. However, all tends to one point; the good design
of the writer is, to blacken. With this laudable view, he
observes the old rule, “Throw dirt enough, and some will
stick:” Knowing that the mud may be thrown in a trice;
but it will take time and pains to scrape it off. Indeed, he
takes true pains to fasten it on; to represent Mr. W. as a
knave and a fool; a man of no conscience, and no under
standing. It is true, the latter is insisted on most at large:
By an hundred instances Mr. H. has made it plain to all the
world, that Mr. W. never had three grains of common sense;
that he is the veriest weathercock that ever was; that he has
not wit enough to be fixed in anything, but is “tossed to
and fro continually;” “that he is to this very moment so
absolutely unsettled with regard to every fundamental doc
trine of the gospel, that no two disputants in the Schools
can be more opposite to each other than he is to himself.”
6. But some may naturally ask, “What is the matter?
What makes Mr. H. so warm? What has Mr. W. done,
that this gentleman, this Christian, ita gladiatorio animo ad
eum affectat viam P* that he falls upon him thus outrageously,
dagger out of sheath, without either rhyme or reason?”
“O, the matter is plain. Beside that he is Mr. F.'s friend,
he is an Arminian; and nothing is bad enough for an
Arminian.” “An Arminian | What is that?” “I cannot
tell exactly; but to be sure it is all that is bad. For a Popish
friar, a Benedictine monk, bears witness, (and Mr. H. avers
* This accommodated quotation from Terence is thus rendered by Colman :
“Growing desperate, and making towards him
With a determined gladiatorial air.”—EDIT.
378 REMARKS ON
the same,) that the tenets of the Church of Rome are nearer
by half to Calvinism than to Arminianism; nearer by half to
Mr. H.’s tenets than to Mr. W.’s.” “Truly, I always thought
so. But still I ask, What is an Arminian?” “Why, in
other words, an election-doubter.” And the “good old
Preacher,” says Mr. H., “places all election-doubters” (that
is, those who are not clear in the belief of absolute predestina
tion) “among the numerous host of the Diabolonians. One
of these being brought before the Judge, the Judge tells him,
“To question election is to overthrow a great doctrine of the
gospel: Therefore he, the election-doubter, must die.’”
(Page 37.) That is, plainly, he must die eternally for this
damnable sin. The very same thing Mr. H. affirms else
where: “The only cement of Christian union is the love of
God; and the foundation of that love must be laid in believing
the truths of God;” (that is, you must believe particular
redemption, or it is impossible you should love God;) for, to
use “the words of Dr. Owen, in his ‘Display of Arminianism,’”
(see the truths which Mr. H. means,) “‘an agreement without
truth is no peace, but a covenant with death, and a conspiracy
against the kingdom of Christ.’” (Page 39.)
7. I am sorry Mr. H. should think so. But so long as he
remains in that sentiment, what peace am I or Mr. F., or
indeed any Arminian, to expect from him? since any agree
ment with us would be “a covenant with death, and a
conspiracy against the kingdom of Christ.” I therefore give
up all hope of peace with him, and with all that are thus
minded. For I do not believe what he terms “the truths of
God,” the doctrine of absolute predestination. I never did
believe it, nor the doctrines connected with it, no, not for an
hour. In this, at least, I have been consistent with myself.
I have never varied an hair's breadth; I cannot while I
believe the Bible, while I believe either the Old or New
Testament. What I do believe, and always have believed in
this matter, I will declare with all simplicity.
“(1.) I believe no decree of reprobation. I do not believe
the Father of spirits ever
Consign'd one unborn soul to hell,
Or damn'd him from his mother's womb.
“(2.) I believe no decree of preterition, which is only
reprobation whitewashed. I do not believe God ever sent
MR. HILL's REVIEw. 379
one man into the world, to whom he had decreed never to
give that grace whereby alone he could escape damnation.
“(3.) I do not believe (what is only preterition or reproba
tion in other words) any such absolute election, as implies
that all but the absolutely elect shall inevitably be damned.
“(4.) I do not believe the doctrine of irresistible grace, or
of infallible perseverance; because both the one and the other
implies that election which cannot stand without preterition
or reprobation.-
“(5.) I do not believe salvation by works. Yet if any man
can prove (what I judge none ever did, or ever will) that there
is no medium between this and absolute predestination; I
will rather subscribe to this than to that, as far less absurd of
the two.”
8. Hinc ille lachrymae. Here is the source of Mr. H.’s
implacable hatred to me. And hence arises his vehement
displeasure at those “Minutes,” which Mr. Sh and he
style “dreadful heresy.” The appellation is just, suppose
(as Mr. H. asserts) all election-doubters are Diabolonians;
suppose no man who is “not clear in the belief of absolute
predestination” can love either God or his neighbour. For
it is certain, the doctrine of the Minutes and of the decrees
cannot stand together. If the doctrine of the decrees stands,
then that of the Minutes must fall; for we willingly allow,
that the one is incompatible with the other. If the doctrine
of the Minutes stands, then that of the decrees must fall.
For it is manifest, this, particularly the last article, strikes at
the very root of Calvinism. Of what consequence is it, then,
to one who is persuaded, the belief of Calvinism is essential
to salvation, to expose those Minutes to the uttermost, as well
as any that dares to defend them?
9. In order to this good end, Mr. H. publishes “A Review
of all the Doctrines taught by Mr. John Wesley.” But is it
possible for any man to do this without reading all the writings
that I have published? It is not possible in the nature of
things; he cannot give an account of what he never read.
And has Mr. H. read all that I have published? I believe
he will not affirm it. So any man of understanding may
judge, before he opens his book, what manner of review it is
likely to contain However, it must be owned that he and
his faithful allies have been at the pains of looking into many
of my writings. I say many; for I apprehend there are many
380 REMARKS ON
more, which they have not so much as looked into; nor does
it appear that they have seriously looked through any, so as
to observe the scope and tenor of them. However, from those
which he or they have, after a fashion, reviewed, abundance of
objections are extracted. It is true, none of them (one only
excepted) are new, and there is hardly one that has not been
answered again and again. Yet since they are proposed in a
new form, they may seem to demand a new answer.
10. The grand objection is, that I am inconsistent with
myself. This, therefore, I shall particularly consider. The
others, which flutter up and down the whole work, I can but
just touch upon. Mr. H. opens the charge thus: “Saying and
unsaying is nothing new with Mr. W., who has only shown
himself consistent, by a regular series of inconsistencies.” (Page
3.) “How full are you of contradictions to yourself! how full
of contrary purposes! How often do you chide with yourself!
How oft do you fight with yourself!” (Title-page.) “Mr. W.
seems well contented you should settle his creed. If you can,
you will do in a few months what he himself has not been able
to effect in near forty years.” “On this fluctuating ocean he
has been tossed for so many years together.” (Page 20.) “All
his Journals and Tracts are replete with proofs of his having
been tossed from one system to another, and from one opinion
to another, from the time of his ordniation to this present
moment.” (Page 143.) “The most ignorant collier can
immediately see his inconsistency with himself.” (Page 145.)
He sums up the whole charge in the lively words of Mr.
Cudworth, graced with the name of Mr. Hervey: “Contradic
tion, didst thou ever know so trusty a friend, so faithful a
devotee? Many people are ready enough to contradict
others; but it seems all one to this gentleman whether it be
another or himself, so he may but contradict.”
11. To prove this indictment, (urged home enough, though
there is not one tittle of truth in it,) Mr. H. has cited no less
than a hundred and one witnesses.* Before I enter upon the
examination of these, I beg leave to transcribe what I wrote
some time since to Dr. Rutherforth: “You frequently charge
me with evasion; and others have brought the same charge.
The plain case is this: I have wrote on various heads; and
* The very number of propositions extracted out of Quesnel's writings, and
condemned as dreadful heresies in the bull Unigénitus ! Exemplum placet ! See
how good wits jump! Mr. H., Father Walsh, and the Pope of Rome!
MR. HILL's REVIEw. 381
always as clearly as I could. Yet many have misunderstood
my words, and raised abundance of objections. I answered
them by explaining myself, showing what I did not mean,
and what I did. One and another of the objectors stretched
his throat, and cried out, “Evasion, evasion l’ And what
does all this outcry amount to? Why, exactly thus much:
They imagined they had tied me so fast, that it was
impossible for me to escape. But presently the cobwebs
were swept away, and I was quite at liberty. And I bless
God I can unravel truth and falsehood, although artfully
twisted together. Of such evasion I am not ashamed. Let
them be ashamed who constrain me to use it.”
12. Mr. H.’s numerous proofs of my contradicting myself
may be ranged under twenty-four heads. I shall examine
these one by one, in what appears to me to be the most
natural order:- I
1. “There was an everlast- “There never was any such
ing covenant between God the covenant between God the
Father and God the Son con- Father and God the Son.”
cerning man's redemption.” (Page 128.)
The latter of these I believe, and always did, since I could
read my Bible.
But Mr. H. brings a passage out of the Christian Library,
to contradict this. On which he parades as follows: “If the
Christian Library be, as Mr. W. affirms, ‘all true, all agree
able to the word of God,” then what are we to think of his
other works? They must be an adulteration of man’s devis
ing.” (Page 128.) “The same may be said of the Minutes:
If these be truly orthodox, upwards of forty volumes of the
Library must be throughly heterodox. And then there is
great reason to lament, that so many poor people's pockets
should be fleeced for what can do their souls no good.”
Peremptory enough ! But let us examine the matter more
closely: “Mr. W. affirms, that the Christian Library is “all
true, all agreeable to-the word of God.’” I do not; and I
am glad I have this public opportunity of explaining myself
concerning it. My words are, “I have made, as I was able,
an attempt of this kind. I have endeavoured to extract such
a collection of English divinity, as, I believe, is all true, all
agreeable to the oracles of God.” (Preface, p. 4.) I did
bclieve, and I do believe, every tract therein to be true, and
382 REMARKS ON
agreeable to the oracles of God. But I do not roundly affirm
this, (as Mr. H. asserts,) of every sentence contained in the
fifty volumes. I could not possibly affirm it, for two reasons:
(1.) I was obliged to prepare most of those tracts for the press,
just as I could snatch time in travelling, not transcribing
them; (none expected it of me;) but only marking the lines
with my pen, and altering or adding a few words here and there,
as I had mentioned in the preface. (2.) As it was not in my
power to attend the press, that care necessarily devolved on
others; through whose inattention a hundred passages were
left in, which I had scratched out; yet not so many as to make
up “forty volumes,” no, nor forty pages. It is probable too, I
myself might overlook some sentences which were not suitable
to my own principles. It is certain, the correctors of the
press did this, in not a few instances. I shall be much obliged
to Mr. H. and his friends, if they will point out all those
instances; and I will print them as an index expurgatorius
to the work, which will make it doubly valuable.
The plain inference is, If there are a hundred passages in
the “Christian Library” which contradict any or all of my
doctrines, these are no proof that I contradict myself. Be
it observed once for all, therefore, citations from the
“Christian Library” prove nothing but the carelessness of
the correctors.
II.
For election and perseverance. Against election and persever
ance. (Page 101.)
2. Mr. Sellon has clearly showed, that the Seventeenth
Article does not assert absolute predestination. Therefore,
in denying this, I neither contradict that Article, nor myself.
3. “I believe there is a But I never thought a babe
state attainable in this life, in Christ was in that state,
from which a man cannot though he is a true believer.
finally fall.”
4. “Saved beyond the dread of falling.” That
So says my brother. is nothing to me.
The note adds: “Mr. W. drew lots, whether or no he
should preach against the Seventeenth Article.”
That paltry story is untrue; though Mr. H. potently
believes it. So all the witticisms built upon it fall to the
ground at once. I never preached against the Seventeenth
Article, nor had the least thought of doing it. But did Mr.
MR. HILL's REVIEw. 383
Hill never preach against the Thirty-first Article, which
explicitly asserts universal redemption?
5. “I do not deny that those
I mean, those that are
eminently styled the elect
“perfected in love,” (1 John
shall infallibly persevere.”
iv. 17,) and those only. So
here is no contradiction.
6. “The love divine
So my brother speaks.
Which made us thine,
But his words cannot prove
Shall keep us thine for ever.”
that I contradict myself.
7. “From all eternity with love
I believe this is true on the
Unchangeable thou hast me view'd.”
supposition of faith foreseen,
not otherwise.
8. “Never again will he take him away.
**
They are my brother’s
words, not mine.
9. “Jesus, the lover of his own,
So are these.
Will love me to the end.”
10. “Christ is in the elect
world of his Church.”
This
is cited from the
“Christian Library.”
So it
goes for nothing.
The nine witnesses, therefore, examined on this head,
prove just nothing at all. So that hitherto there is not the
least proof that I contradict myself.
III.
For imputed righteousness.
Against imputed righteous
77 ess.
11. “We no more deny the
phrase (of imputed righteous
ness) than the thing.”
“Do not dispute for that
particular phrase.” Here is
no contradiction: I do not
deny it; yet I dare not
dispute for it.
12. “This doctrine I have
believed and taught for near
eight-and-twenty years.”
“The use of that term has
done immense hurt.”
It has ; but here
is no
contradiction.
13. This is a citation from the “Christian Library.”
So
it goes for nothing.
14. “I continually affirm,
that the righteousness of
Christ (in the sense there
explained) is imputed to every
believer.”
“Where is the use of
contending so strenuously for
those expressions?” I ask
it again. But where is the
contradiction?
384 REMARKS ON
15. This is another citation from the “Christian Library.”
So it proves nothing.
16. “The wedding-garment
The wedding-garment is ho
is Christ’s righteousness, first
liness. This does not exclude,
imputed, and then implanted.”
but presupposes, the other.
17. “This is consistent
“John Goodwin contradicts
with our being justified
this.” Perhaps so; but John
through the imputation of
Goodwin is not John Wesley.
Christ's righteousness.”
Whatever, therefore, he says,
(observe it once for all,) does
not prove that I contradict myself. I am no way engaged to
defend every expression of either John Goodwin, or Richard
Baxter's Aphorisms. The sense of both I generally approve,
the language many times I do not.
But I observe here, and in fifty other instances, Mr. H.
mentions no page. Now, in controversy, he that names no
page has no right to any answer.
18. “I frequently put this
expression into the mouth of
a whole congregation; that
is, I sing an hymn wherein it
occurs.”
“I dare not require any to
use it.” True; but here is
no contradiction. I do not
require any to use it. Every
one in the congregation may
use or let it alone.
Here comes in a thundering note: “Although most of these
extracts from Mr. Wesley's sermon on Jeremiah xxiii. 6,
have a very evangelical appearance, yet all their excellency
vanisheth away, when we are told in the same sermon, that the
righteousness he contends for is not the divine righteousness
of Christ, but his human righteousness. When we consider
the express words of the text, ‘The Lord our Righteousness,”
one might wonder (if anything is to be wondered at that
Mr. Wesley affirms) how he could possibly fall into an error,
which at once not only destroys the meritorious efficacy
of the Redeemer’s righteousness, but undermines the virtue
of his atoning blood.” This is home; Mr. Hill has broke
my head sadly. But he will soon give me a plaster: “How
ever, if Mr. Wesley will acknowledge, that by Christ’s
human righteousness, he means that mediatorial righteous
ness which was wrought by God in the human nature, I
entirely acquiesce with him on the point.” This is truly
marvellous! Why, what could Mr. Wesley mean beside?
So this error proves to be no error at all ! And “all
MR. HILL's REVIEw. 385
the excellency” which “vanisheth away,” appears again in
statu quo !
But we are not come to the end of the note yet; it contains
another dreadful objection: “Mr. Wesley is unwilling” (truly
I am) “to be ranked among the Diabolonians, and therefore,
with more prudence than candour, has left the whole passage
concerning the election-doubters out of the ‘Holy War.”
And if Mr. Hill had omitted it too, it would have been no
more an impeachment of his prudence, than it was of my
candour, to omit, in all the tracts I abridged, whatever I dis
approved of. This was what I professed at my setting out:
“I have endeavoured” (these are my very words) “to preserve
a consistency throughout, that no part might contradict any
other. But in order to this, I have been obliged to omit the
far greatest part of several authors. And in a design of this
nature, I apprehend myself to be at full liberty so to do.”
(Preface, p. 5.) The “abridged Bunyan” is not therefore
“the counterfeit Bunyan.” This is a flourish of Mr. Hill's pen.
19. This instance sets nothing against nothing, the
“Christian Library” against John Goodwin.
20. “This is an emblem of “John Goodwin contradicts
the righteousness of the saints, this.” So he may; but I am
both of their justification and not John Goodwin. So we
sanctification.” have examined twenty wit
nesses; and not one of all
these proves that I contradict
myself.
21. “I would address my
self to you who are so ready
to condemn all that use these
expressions as Antinomians.”
“On Mr. Hervey's using
one of them, Mr. Wesley says,
‘Why are you at such pains
to increase the number of
Antinomians?’”
But I do not condemn him as an Antinomian : Therefore,
here is no contradiction.
Whether it is or no, it is
wide of the mark; for this is
none of the expressions in
question.
Yes; but it is none of the
expressions in question: So
it is no contradiction.
22. Again: “Is not this,
that Christ has satisfied the de
mands of the law,the very quin
tessence of Antinomianism?”
23. Again: “To say, ‘The
claims of the law are all an
swered,” is not this Antino
mianism without a mask?”
VOL. X.
C. c.
386 REMARKS ON
So I think. Yet I do not
condemn all that use them as
Antinomians: So here is no
contradiction still.
25. “It is by faith we build
on this foundation, the im
puted righteousness of Christ.”
24. Once more: “There
are many expressions in this
Dialogue which directly lead
to Antinomianism.”
“If faith in the imputed
righteousness of Christ is a
fundamental principle, what
becomes of all those who
think nothing about imputed
righteousness?”
Here is no contradiction.
Suppose I build my faith on this
foundation, the imputed righteousness of Christ, it does not
follow it is so fundamental a principle, that all who think
nothing about it will be damned.
26. “But is not a believer
Goodwin; that is, nothing.
clothed with the righteousness
of Christ? Undoubtedly heis.”
27. “The mantle of Christ's
righteousness.” (Christian Li
Goodwin again: Nothing
against nothing.
brary.)
28. “Christian Library.”
29. “The sole cause of our
acceptance with God is the
righteousness and the death of
Christ, who fulfilled God’s
law, and died in our stead.”
Nothing.
“I cannot prove, that it was
requisite for Christ to fulfil
the moral law in order to his
purchasing redemption for us.
By his sufferings alone the
law was satisfied.”
Undoubtedly it was.
Therefore, although I believe Christ
fulfilled God's law, yet I do not affirm he did this to purchase
redemption for us. This was done by his dying in our stead.
30. “Verses
of Charles Let him answer.
Wesley.”
31, 32, 33. “Title to Life.”
John Goodwin: Nothing.
“Christian Library.” No
thing.
34. “The righteousness of
Ditto.
Christ is imputed to every one
that believes.”
Here follows another thundering note: “When Mr. Wesley
preached this sermon, he told the congregation, ‘It was the
same doctrine which Mr. Romaine, Mr. Madan, and Mr.
Whitefield preached.” So it was; Mr. Whitefield did, Mr.
MR. HILL's REview. 387
Romaine and Mr. Madan do, preach the doctrine contained in
that sermon; namely, that “we are justified, sanctified, and
glorified, merely for the sake of what Christ has done and
suffered for us.” But did I say, this was all the doctrine which
they preached ? No; and no man in his senses could under
stand me so. I did not therefore “impose on the credulity of
my hearers, by making them believe” any more than was
strictly true. But “did they ever hold the tenets pleaded for
in the books published by Mr. Wesley?” Whether they did
or no is out of the present question; they did, and do, hold
the doctrine contained in that sermon, “Mr. Wesley knows,
they from their hearts subscribe to Mr. Hervey’s Eleven
Letters.” I hope not; from any that do, I expect no more
mercy than from a mad dog. “But if he had constantly
preached that doctrine, how came so many to testify their
surprise at that discourse?” Because God set it home upon
their hearts. Hence it appeared new, though they had heard
it over and over. “How came they to press the printing of it,
in order to stop the mouths of gainsayers?” Because they
judged it would affect others as it affected them; though I
never thought it would. “Lastly: If Mr. Wesley had con
stantly maintained this doctrine, why must poor John Bunyan
be embowelled, to make him look like Mr. Wesley?” No.;
his Calvinism is omitted, to make him like the authors going
before him; “to preserve a consistency throughout the work;”
which still is not done as I could wish. However, those that
are fond of his bowels may put them in again, and swallow
them as they would the trail of a woodcock.
35. “They to whom the “The nice, metaphysical doc.
righteousness of Christ is trine of imputed righteousness,
imputed (I mean, who truly instead of furthering men in
believe) are made righteous holiness, makes them satisfied
by the Spirit of Christ.” without any holiness at all.”
I have known a thousand instances of this. And yet “they
who truly believe in Christ are made righteous by his Spirit.”
Where is the contradiction between these propositions?
36. “Christian Library.” Nothing.
37. “Christ is now the Baxter's Aphorisms go for
righteousness of all that truly nothing. Richard Baxter is
believe.” not John Wesley.
38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43. Nothing.
Nothing against
2 C 2
388 REMARKS ON
44. “To all believers, the Goodwin : Nothing.
righteousness of Christ is
imputed.”
We have now examined four-and-forty witnesses; but still
have no proof that I contradict myself, either with regard to
the covenant, election, and perseverance, or the imputed righte
ousness of Christ. With regard to this, the thing, that we are
justified merely for the sake of what Christ has done and suf
fered, I have constantly and earnestly maintained above four
and-thirty years. And I have frequently used the phrase,
hoping thereby to please others “for their good to edification.”
But it has had a contrary effect, since so many improve it into
an objection. Therefore, I will use it no more, unless it occur
in an hymn, or steal upon me unawares; I will endeavour to
use only such phrases as are strictly scriptural. And I will
advise all my brethren, all who are in connexion with me
throughout the three kingdoms, to lay aside that ambiguous,
unscriptural phrase, which issoliable to be misinterpreted, and to
speak in all instances, this in particular, “as the oracles of God.”
IV.
“Suffering the penalty is not Suffering the penalty is all the
all the law requires.” law requires. (Page 132.)
45. “So says the ‘Christian So says John Goodwin.
Library.”
But this does not prove that I contradict myself.
V.
St. Paul speaks of the law as St. Paul does not speak of the
a person. law as a person. (P. 138.)
46. “The law is here spoken “This way of speaking of
of as a person, to which, as to the law as a person injured,
an husband, life and death are and to be satisfied, seems
ascribed.” hardly defensible.”
There is no contradiction here. I do affirm, St. Paul speaks
of the law “as a person to which, as an husband, life and
death are ascribed.” But I deny, that he speaks of it “as a
person injured, and to be satisfied.”
VI.
For a twofold justification. Against a twofold justification.
47. “Mr. F. affirms, justi- “The justification spoken
fication is twofold.” of by St. Paul to the Romans,
and in our Articles, is one and
no more.” (Page 133.)
MR. HILL’s REVIEw. 389
Most true. tion. (Matt. xii. 37.) And yet our Lord speaks of another justifica
Now, I think one and one make two.
VII.
For a justified state.
48. “The state of a justified
person is inexpressibly great
and glorious.”
Against a justified state.
(Page 139.)
“Does not talking of a
justified or sanctified state
tend to mislead men?” It
frequently does. But where
is the contradiction?
VIII.
They who are once justified
are justified for ever.
49. “Christian Library.”
They who are justified may
become total apostates.
Nothing.
IX.
Works are a condition of jus
tification. (Page 134.)
50. “Salvation (that is,
glory) is not by the merit of
works, but by works as a
condition.”
This proposition does not
speak of justification: So it
is nothing to the purpose.
Works are not a condition of
justification.
I believe no good works
can be previous to justifica
tion; nor, consequently, a
condition of it.
51. “If a man could be
holy before he was justified,
it would set his justification
aside.”
“Whoever desires to find
favour with God, should
“cease from evil, and learn to
do well.’ Whoever repents,
should do “works meet for
repentance.’ And if this is
not in order to find favour,
what does he do them for?”
52. “Thou canst do no
thing but sin till thou art
justified.”
53. “We allow that God
justifies the ungodly, him that
to that hour is full of all evil,
void of all good; and him that
worketh not, that till that mo
ment worketh no goodness.”
All this I believe still.
“But Mr. W. says, Whoever
desires to find favour with God should “cease from evil and
learn to do well,’” &c. Does not the Bible say so? Who
can deny it? “Nay, but Mr. W. asks, “If this be not in
order to find favour, what does he do them for?’” And I
390 REMARKS ON
ask it again. Let Mr. H., or any one else, give me an answer.
So, if there is any contradiction here, it is not I contradict
myself, but Isaiah and our Lord that contradict St. Paul.
X.
Against justification by the For justification by the act of
act of believing. believing.
54. “But do not you put “The faith which is said to
faith in the room of Christ be imputed to Abraham for
and his righteousness? No;
righteousness, is faith pro
I take particular care to put
perly taken; and not the
each of these in its proper
righteousness of Christ ap
place.” prehended by faith.”
This is putting “each of these in its proper place.” The
righteousness of Christ is the meritorious cause of our
justification: That is its proper place. Faith in Him that
gave himself for us is the condition of justification: That is
its proper place.
I am justified through the righteousness of Christ, as the
price; through faith, as the condition. I do not say, neither
does Goodwin, Faith is that for which we were accepted; but
we both say, Faith is that through which we are accepted.
We are justified, we are accepted of God, for the sake of
Christ, through faith. Now, certainly, there is no contra
diction in this, unless a contradiction to Mr. H.’s notions.
55. “Although we have “That which is the condi
faith, hope, and love, yet we tion of justification is not the
must renounce the merit of righteousness of Christ.”
all, as far too weak to deserve Most true; otherwise we
our justification; for which confound the condition with
we must trust only to the
the meritorious cause spoken
merits of Christ.”
of in the opposite column.
XI.
Justification by faith alone is
articulus stantis vel cadentis
ecclesiae.* All who do not
hold it must perish ever
lastingly.
Justification by faith alone is
not articulus stantis vel ca
dentis ecclesiae. Some may
doubt of it, yea, deny it, and
yet not perish everlastingly.
(Page 127.)
* A doctrine without which there can be no Christian Church.
MR. HILL's REVIEw. 391
56. “Of this may be affirm
ed, (what Luther affirms of
justification by faith,) that it
is articulus stantis vel cadentis
ecclesiae, the pillar of that
faith of which alone cometh
salvation; that faith which
unless a man keep whole and
undefiled, without doubt he
“A pious Churchman who
has not clear conceptions of
justification by faith may be
saved; yea, a Mystic, (Mr.
Law, for instance,) who denies
justification by faith. If so,
the doctrine of justification
by faith is not articulus stan
tis vel cadentis ecclesiae.”
shall perish everlastingly.”
It is certain here is a seeming contradiction; but it is not
a real one.
For these two opposite propositions do not speak
of the same thing.
The latter speaks of justification by faith;
the former, of trusting in the righteousness or merits of
Christ; justification by faith is only mentioned incidentally
in a parenthesis. Now, although Mr. Law denied justification
by faith, he might trust in the merits of Christ. It is this,
and this only, that I affirm, (whatever Luther does,) to be
articulus stantis vel cadentis ecclesiae.
XII.
Mr. W. is a Calvinist in the Mr. W. has leaned too much
point of justification.
toward Calvinism in this
Apoint.
57. “I think on justifica
tion just as I have done these
seven-and-twenty years, and
just as Calvin does.”
“We have leaned too
much toward Calvinism.”
(Page 141.)
But not in this point; not
as to justification by faith.
We still agree with him, that the merits of Christ are the
cause, faith the condition, of justification.
58. “I have occasionally
Goodwin. Nothing.
used those expressions, ‘im
puted righteousness, the
‘righteousness of Christ, and
the like. But I never used
them in any other sense than
that wherein Calvin does.”
59. “Mr. W. does approve
the expression, ‘Why me?’”
My brother uses it in an
hymn.
XIII.
“Mr. W. does not approve the
expression, ‘Why me?’”
“Mr. F.says, Mr. W. doubts
concerning it.” (Page 140.)
392 REMARKS ON
This proof halts on both feet. “But why did not Mr.
W. strike out of Mr. F.'s manuscript the honourable expres
sions concerning himself?” Because he thought them a
proper counterbalance to the contumelious expressions of
Mr. H.
XIV.
Our sin is imputed to Christ,
and Christ’s righteousness
to us.
60, 61, 62. “Christian Li
brary.”
Our sin is not imputed to
Christ, nor Christ’s righte
ousness to us. (Page 130.)
Nothing.
XV.
Both Adam’s sin and Christ’s
righteousness are imputed.
Neither Adam’s sin nor Christ's
righteousness is imputed.
(Page 131.)
63. Nothing against no
thing.
In what sense I believe the “Christian Library” to be all
true, I have declared above.
XVI.
Mr. W. holds free-will.
Mr. W. wonders how any man
can hold free-will.
“Mr. W. denies it.”
64. “Mr.
F. holds free
Will.”
This may prove that Mr. W. contradicts Mr. F., but it can
never prove that he contradicts himself.
But, indeed, both
Mr. F. and Mr. W. absolutely deny natural free-will.
We
both steadily assert that the will of man is by nature free
only to evil. Yet we both believe that every man has a
measure of free-will restored to him by grace.
XVII.
For the doctrine of merit.
65. “We are rewarded ac
cording to our works, yea, be
cause of our works. How does
this differ from, ‘for the sake
of our works?’ And how differs
this from secundum merita
Against the doctrine of merit.
“And yet I still maintain,
there is no merit, taking the
word strictly, but in the blood
of Christ; that salvation is
not by the merit of works; and
that there is nothing we are, or
MR. HILL’s REVIEW. 393
operum, or, “as our works de
serve?” Can you split this
hair? I doubt I cannot.”—
have, or do, which can, strictly
speaking, deserve the least
thing at God’s hand.”
I say so still. Let Mr. H.,
if he can.
And all this is no more than to say, Take the word merit
in a strict sense, and I utterly renounce it; take it in a
looser sense, and though I never use it, yet I do not
condemn it.
Therefore, with regard to the word merit, I do
not contradict myself at all.
XVIII.
For a single life.
66. “Mr. W. says, his
thoughts on a single life are
just the same they have been
these thirty years.”
67. “He advises that we
should pray against mar
riage.”
Against a single life.
“Why, then, did Mr. W.
marry?” For reasons best
known to himself. (Page 136.)
“I advise single persons to
pray, that they may prize the
advantages they enjoy.”
Be this right or wrong, still here is no contradiction.
XIX.
For gay apparel.
68. “To make it a point
of conscience to differ from
others (as the Quakers do) in
the shape or colour of their
apparel, is mere superstition.”
Against gay apparel.
“Let a single intention to
please God prescribe both
what clothing you should buy,
and the manner wherein it
shall be made.” (Ibid.) This
I stand to.
So I advise; but I do not
“Wear nothi g of a glaring
“make it a point of con
colour, or made in the very
science.” So here is no height of the fashion.”
contradiction still.
XX.
Against tea. For tea.
69. “Mr. W. published a
I did set them an example
tract against drinking tea,
and told the tea-drinkers, he
for twelve years. Then, at
the close of a consumption,
would set them an example in
by Dr. Fothergill's direction,
that piece of self-denial.”
I used it again.
394 REMARKS ON
But must not a man be sadly in want of argument who
stoops so low as this?
XXI.
For baptism by sprinkling.
70. “As there is no clear
proof of dipping in Scripture,
so there is very probable
proof to the contrary.”
71. “Christ nowhere, as
far as I can find, requires
dipping, but only baptizing;
which word signifies to pour
on, or sprinkle, as well as to
dip.”
Against baptism by sprink
ling.
“When Mr. W. baptized
Mrs. L. S., he held her so long
under water, that her friends
screamed out, thinking she
had been drowned.”
When ? Where ? I never
heard of it before.
“Why then did you at Sa
vannah baptize all children by
immersion, unless the parents
certified they were weak?”
Not because I had any
scruple, but in obedience to
the Rubric. So here is no
self-inconsistency.
XXII.
Mr. W. never adopted Mr.
Mr. W. highly approved of
Law’s scheme.
Mr. Law.
These propositions are not contradictory.
I might highly
approve of him, and yet not adopt his scheme.
How will
Mr. H. prove that I did? or that I contradict myself on this
head? Why thus:—
72. “I had been eight years
at Oxford before I read any
of Mr. Law’s writings. And
when I did, I was so far from
making them my creed, that
I had objections to almost
every page.” (Page 135.)
True; but neither does this
prove that I adopted his
scheme.
“To instruct a person in
the nature of Christianity, I
fixed an hour a day, to read
with her in Mr. Law’s treatise
on ‘Christian Perfection.’”
I did so. And an excellent
book it is, though liable to
many objections.
“Another little company of
us met: We sung, read a
little of Mr. Law, and then
conversed.”
MR. HILL's REVIEw. 395
73. “I believe the Mystic
writers to be one great Anti
christ.”
74. “Mr. F. affirms, Solo
mon is the chief of Mystics;
and Mr. W. acquiesces in the
affirmation.”
I retract this. It is far too
strong. But observe, I never
contradicted it till now !
I do not. I affirm no such
thing. Therefore all Mr. H.
builds upon this is only a
castle in the air.
XXIII.
Enoch and Elijah are in
Enoch and Elijah are not in
heaven.
heaven.
75. “Enoch and Elijah en
“Enoch and Elijah are not
tered at once into the highest
in heaven, but only in para
degree of glory.” dise.” (Page 138.)
“Notes on the New Testament, John iii. 13, first edition.”
But why is Mr. H. so careful to name the first edition?
Because in the second the mistake is corrected. Did he
know this? And could he avail himself of a mistake which
he knew was removed before he wrote |
XXIV.
For sinless perfection. Against sinless perfection.
Upon this head Mr. H. employs his whole strength. I
will therefore the more carefully weigh what he advances;
only premising, before I descend to particulars, two general
observations:
(1.) Out of the twenty-five passages cited for perfection,
seventeen are taken from my brother’s Hymns. These,
therefore, strike wide. Whatever they prove, they cannot
prove that I contradict myself.
(2.) Out of the twenty-five cited against perfection, four
teen are cited from the sermon on “Sin in Believers.” Do I
mean, in such believers as are “perfected in love?” Mr. H.
himself knows I do not. Why then every one of these four
teen arguments is an abuse both upon me and his readers.
It is the most egregious trifling that can be conceived. I
affirm, “Those perfected in love are saved from inward sin.”
To prove I contradict myself herein, fourteen passages are
alleged, wherein I affirm, “We are not saved from inward
sin, till we are ‘perfected in love.’”
(3.) The same fallacy is used in every instance, when some
of my words are set in opposition to others. The sum is, -
weak believers, babes in Christ, are not, adult believers are,
396 REMARKS ON
saved from inward sin. And I still aver, there is no contra
diction in this, if I know what a contradiction means.
Now to the proofs:—
76. “The Son hath made
them who are thus ‘born of
“They are sensible of pride
remaining in their hearts.”
God’ free from pride.”
They? Who? Not those who are thus “born of God,”
who are “perfected in love.”
77. “From the iniquity of pride,
And self, I shall be free.”
That is, when I am “perfected
in love.”
78. “They are freed from
wanderings in prayer.”
“God’s children are daily
sensible of pride and self
will.” That is, till they are
“perfected in love.”
Is this spoken of all be
lievers? Mr. H. knows it
is not.
79. “Christians are saved
from all sin, from all unrighte
ousness.”
80. “They (adult Chris
tians) are freed from all evil
thoughts and evil tempers.”
81. “They (fathers in Christ)
are freed from evil thoughts.”
True, adult Christians.
“The (infant) children of
God have in them sin of every
kind.”
“The evil nature opposes
the Spirit even in believers,”
—till they arefathers in Christ.
82. “Christ was free from
sinful thoughts. So are they
likewise,”—adult believers.
83. “I believe some would
say, ‘We trust we do keep
the whole law of love.’”
“This doctrine (that all be
lievers are thus free) is wholly
new.”
“Believers are conscious of
not fulfilling the whole law of
love;” not till they are “per
fected in love.”
The reader will please to remember all along, the question
is not whether the doctrine be right or wrong, (that has been
elsewhere considered,) but whether I contradict myself.
Upwards of fourscore witnesses have been already examined
on this head; but no contradiction is proved yet.
84. “Some do love God with “They (weak believers) do
all their heart and strength.” not love God with all their
heart and strength.”
85. “From that hour, indwelling sin,
Thou hast no place in me.”Believers are not delivered
from the being of sin till that
hour.
MR. HILL's REVIEw. 397
86. “A sinless life we live.” “Christian Library :” NO
thing.
87. “While one evil thought can rise, My brother said so once:
I am not born again.” I never did.
In the note annexed there are many mistakes: (1) “The
author of this hymn did not allow any one to be a believer,
even in the lowest sense, while he found the least stirring of
sin.” He did; but he took the word “born again” in too
high a sense. (2.) Yet “he supposes the most advanced
believers are deeply sensible of their impurity.” He does not;
neither he nor I suppose any such thing. (3.) “He tells us in
his note on Eph. vi. 13, ‘The war is perpetual.’” True: The
war with “principalities and powers;” but not that “with
flesh and blood.” (4.) So you cannot reply: “Mr. W. speaks
of believers of different stature.” Indeed I can; and the
forgetting this is the main cause of Mr. H.’s stumbling at
every step. (5) “The position, that any believers are totally
free from sin, is diametrically opposite to Calvinism.” This
is no mistake. Therefore most Calvinists hate it with a perfect
hatred. (6.) “Many of the grossest of these contradictions
were published nearly at the same time; and probably Mr. W.
was the same day correcting the press, both for and against
sinless perfection.” An ingenious thought ! but as to the truth
or even probability of it, I cannot say much. (7.) “These
Hymns contain the joint sentiments of Mr. John and Mr.
Charles Wesley.” Not always; so that if some of them
contradict others, it does not prove that I contradict myself.
88. “Christ in a pure and sinless “There are still two con
heart.” trary principles in believers,
nature and grace.” True,
till they are perfect in love.
89. “Quite expel the carnal mind.” “That there is no sin in
a (weak) believer, no carnal
mind, is contrary to the word
of God.”
90. “From every evil motion freed.” “How naturally do men
think, Sin has no motion;
therefore it has no being !”
But how does this prove that I contradict myself?
91. “All the struggle then is o'er.” These are two of my
92. “I wrestle not now.” brother’s expressions, which
I do not subscribe to.
398 REMARKS ON
93. “God is thine: Disdain to fear
The enemy within.” “Let us watch and pray
against the enemy within.”
Are these lines cited as implying the enemy was not within 2
Most unhappily. They mean, the enemy which is within.
For the very next words, which Mr. H. himself cited but the
page before, are,
God shall in thy flesh appear,
And make an end of sin.
94. “We wrestle not with
“We wrestle both with
flesh and blood when * we
flesh and blood, and with
are grown up in Christ.
principalities,” while we are
babes in Christ.
No contradiction yet.
95. “Sin shall not in our flesh remain.”
“Still he (the babe in
Christ) feels the remains of
the old man.”
96. “I cannot rest if sin in me
“Sin remains in them
remains.”
still;”—in all weak believers.
97, 98, 99. My brother's.
100. “Do not the best of
“We groan, being burdened
men say, ‘We groan, being
with numberless infirmities,
burdened with the workings of
temptations, and sins.”—This
inbred corruption?’” This
is wrong. It is not the mean
is not the meaning of the
ing of the text. I will put it
text: The whole context
out, if I live to print another
shows the cause of that
edition. So just one shot in
groaning was, their longing
a hundred has hit the mark.
to be with Christ.
. 101. “Nor does he that is
“Many infirmities remain,
born of God sin by infirmi
whereby we are daily subject
ties; for his infirmities have
to what are called “sins of
no concurrence of his will;
infirmity.’ And they are in
and without this, they are not
some sense sins; as being
properly sins.”—That is, they
(involuntary) transgressions
are not voluntary transgres
of the perfect law.”
sions of a known law.
I see no contradiction here; but if there was, it ought not to
have been mentioned. It could not by any generous writer;
since Mr. Hill himself testifies, it was expunged before he
mentioned it! But suppose it stood as at first, I flatly deny
that it is any contradiction at all. These infirmities may be
in some sense sins; and yet not properly so; that is, sins in
an improper, but not in the proper, sense of the word.
MR. HILL's REVIEw. 399
13. But “Mr. W. has not yet determined, whether sins of
surprise bring the soul under condemnation or not. However,
it were to be wished, that sins of surprise and sins of infirmity
too were to be declared mortal at the next Conference; since
several persons who pretend to reverence Mr. W., not only
fall into outrageous passions, but cozen and overreach their
neighbours; and call these things little, innocent infirmities.
Reader, weigh well those words of Mr. W., “We cannot say,
either that men are or are not condemned for sins of surprise.”
And yet immediately before, he calls them transgressions, as
here he calls them sins. Strange divinity this, for one who,
for near forty years past, has professed to believe and teach
that “sin is the transgression of the law,’ and that ‘the.
wages of sin is death.’” He then brings three instances of
sins of surprise, (over and above cozening and overreaching,)
drunkenness, fornication, and flying into a passion and
knocking a man down; and concludes, “Mr. W. had better
sleep quietly, than rise from his own pillow in order to lull
his hearers asleep upon the pillow of false security, by speak
ing in so slight a manner of sin, and making the breach of
God’s holy law a mere nothing.” (Page 111.)
14. This is a charge indeed! And it is perfectly new : I
believe it was never advanced before. It will not, therefore,
be improper to give it a thorough examination. It is
founded on some passages in the sermon on Romans viii. 1 :
“There is therefore now no condemnation to them that are
in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after the
Spirit.” In order to give a clear view of the doctrine therein
delivered, I must extract the sum of the Sermon.
I show, (1.) Who are “those that are in Christ Jesus;”—
“Those who are joined to the Lord in one spirit, who dwell
in Christ and Christ in them. And ‘whosoever abideth in
Him sinneth not, walketh not after the flesh,’ that is, corrupt
nature. These abstain from every design, and word, and
work, to which the corruption of nature leads.” (Vol. V.,
p. 88.) “They “walk after the Spirit’ both in their hearts
and lives. By him they are led into every holy desire, into
every divine and heavenly temper, till every thought of their
heart is ‘holiness to the Lord.”
“They are also led by Him into all holiness of conversation.
They exercise themselves day and night, to do only the things
which please God: In all their outward behaviour, to follow him
400 REMARKS ON
‘who left us an example that we might tread in his steps; in
all their intercourse with their neighbour, to walk in justice,
mercy, and truth; and whatsoever they do in every circumstance
of life to ‘do all to the glory of God.’” (Ibid., p. 89.)
Is here any room for “cozening and overreaching; ” for
“flying into outrageous passions?” Does this give any
countenance for “knocking men down?” for “drunkenness
or fornication ?”
But let us go on to the Second head: “To whom is there
no condemnation? To believers in Christ, who thus ‘walk
after the Spirit, there is no condemnation for their past
sins.” (Ibid.) “Neither for present, for now transgressing
the commandments of God; for they do not transgress them.
This is a proof of their love of God, that they keep his com
mandments.” (Ibid., p. 90.) “They are not condemned,
(3.) for inward sin, so long as they do not yield thereto; so
long as they maintain a continual war with all sin, with pride,
anger, desire, so that the flesh hath no dominion over them,
but they still ‘walk after the Spirit.’” (Ibid., p. 91.) Is any
encouragement given here to cozeners or whoremongers?
It follows, “They are not condemned for sins of infirmity,
as they are usually called. Perhaps it were advisable rather
to call them infirmities, that we may not seem to give any
countenance to sin, or to extenuate it in any degree, by thus
coupling it with infirmity. But, if we must use such an
ambiguous and dangerous expression, by sins of infirmity I
would mean, such involuntary failings as the saying a thing
we believe true, though in fact it prove to be false; or the
hurting our neighbour without knowing or designing it,
perhaps when we designed to do him good.” (Ibid., p. 92.)
What pretence has Mr. H. from these words to flourish
away upon my “strange divinity;” and to represent me as
giving men a handle to term gross sins innocent infirmities?
But now comes the main point: “It is more difficult to
determine concerning those which are usually styled sins of
surprise: As when one who commonly in his patience possesses
his soul, on a sudden or violent temptation, speaks or acts in a
manner not consistent with the royal law of love.” (For instance:
You have the gout. A careless man treads on your foot. You
violently push him away, and, it may be, cry out, “Get away!
Get you out of my sight!”) “Perhaps it is not easy to fix a
general rule concerning transgressions of this nature. We can
MR. HILL's REVIEW. 401
not say either that men are, or that they are not, condemned
for sins of surprise in general.” (Pages 152, 153.)
“Reader,” says Mr. H., “let me beg thee to weigh well
the foregoing words.” I say so too. I go on : “But it
seems, whenever a believer is overtaken in a fault, there is
more or less condemnation, as there is more or less concur
rence of his will. Therefore, some sins of surprise bring
much guilt and condemnation. For in some instances our
being surprised may be owing to some culpable neglect, or
to a sleepiness of soul, which might have been prevented or
shaken off before the temptation came. The falling even
by surprise, in such an instance, exposes the sinner to
condemnation, both from God and his own conscience.
“On the other hand, there may be sudden assaults, which
he hardly could foresee, by which he may be borne down,
suppose into a degree of anger, or thinking evil of another,
with scarce any concurrence of the will. Now, in such a
case, the jealous God would undoubtedly show him that he
had done foolishly. He would be convinced of having
swerved from the perfect law, and consequently grieved with
a godly sorrow, and lovingly ashamed before God. Yet need
he not come into condemnation. In the midst of that sorrow
and shame, he can still say, ‘The Lord is my strength and
my song; he is also become my salvation.’” (Page 154.)
Now, what can any impartial person think of Mr. H.’s
eloquence on this head? What a representation has he
given of my doctrine, with regard to infirmities and sins of
surprise? Was ever anything more unjust? Was ever
anything more cruel? Do I here “lull my readers asleep on
the pillow of false security?” Do I “speak in a light
manner of sin?” or “make the breach of God's holy law a
mere nothing?” What excuse can be made for pouring out
all this flood of calumny? Can anything be termed
“bearing false witness against our neighbour,” if this is not?
Am I indeed a loose casuist? Do any of my writings give
countenance to sin? Not so: God knows, Mr. Hill knows,
Mr. Romaine, who corrected this tract, knows it well. So
does Mr. Madan; yea, so do all who read what I write,
unless they wilfully shut their eyes.
15. “Thus have I at length,” says Mr. H., “brought this
extraordinary farrago to a conclusion. Not because I could
not have found many more inconsistencics.” (Page 142.)
VOII. X. D D
402 REMARKS ON
Yes, another hundred, such as these. But see a group of
them at once: “His extract from Bishop Beveridge is flatly
contradicted in his edition of ‘John Goodwin. Again:
Goodwin is flatly contradicted by his sermon on ‘The Lord
our Righteousness.’ This sermon is contradicted in his
‘Preservative against Unsettled Notions in Religion. This
Preservative is itself contradicted by his ‘Abstract from Dr.
Preston. This Abstract is itself contradicted by his edition
of ‘Baxter's Aphorisms.’ And these are again flatly contra
dicted by his ‘Extract from Bishop Beveridge.’ And this is
again flatly contradicted by his own ‘Thoughts on Imputed
Righteousness.’ Thus the wheel runs round !” Thus Mr.
H.’s head runs round with more haste than good speed. (If
this curious paragraph be not rather, as I suspect, supplied
by another hand; even as Sternhold’s Psalms are now and
then eked out by N. N., or William Wisdom.) He forgets
that generals prove nothing; and that he has sadly failed in
his particular charges; just an hundred, out of an hundred
and one, having proved void. So that now I have full right
to say, Whence arises this charge of inconsistency and self
contradiction? Merely from straining, winding to and fro,
and distorting a few innocent words. For wherein have I
contradicted myself, taking words in their unforced, natural
construction, in any one respect, with regard to justification,
since the year 1738?
16. But Mr. H.’s head is so full of my self-inconsistency,
that he still blunders on: “Mr. W.’s wavering disposition is
not an affair of yesterday. Mr. Delamotte spake to him on
this head more than thirty years ago.” (Page 143.) He
never spake to me on this head at all. Ask him. He is still
alive. “He has been tossed from one system to another,
from the time of his ordination to the present moment.”
Nothing can be more false; as not only my “Journals,” but
all my writings, testify. “And he himself cannot but
acknowledge that both his friends and foes have accused him
of his unsettled principles in religion.” Here is artifice
Would any man living, who does not know the fact, suppose
that a gentleman would face a man down, in so peremptory a
manner, unless the thing were absolutely true? And yet it
is quite the reverse. “He himself cannot but acknowledge l”
I acknowledge no such thing. My friends have oftener
accused me of being too stiff in my opinions, than too flexible.
MR. HILL's REVIEw. 403
My enemies have accused me of both; and of everything
besides. The truth is, from the year 1725, I saw more and
more of the nature of inward religion, chiefly by reading the
writings of Mr. Law, and a few other mystic writers. Yet I
never was “in the way of Mysticism” at all; this is another
mistake. Although I did not clearly see that we “are saved by
faith” till the year 1738, I then published the sermon on “Sal
vation by Faith,” every sentence of which I subscribe to now.
17. But he “was too scrupulous about using the word
condition.” (Page 143.) I was so, till I was convinced by
Dr. Church, that it was a very innocent word; and one that
none of the Reformers, English or foreign, objected to. All
this time I leaned towards Calvinism, though more in
expression than sentiment. “And now he fairly gives up
the necessity of a clear belief of justification by faith
alone!” That is, I say, A man may be saved, who is not
clear in his judgment concerning it. I do; I dare not
“rank Mr. Law, and all his admirers, among the hosts of
Diabolonians.” Nay, more: “I have proved that he makes
'man's righteousness the procuring cause of his acceptance
with God; and his salvation, from first to last, to depend
upon the intrinsic merit of his own unassisted works.” (Page
144.) I think Mr. H. “is now got to his ne plus ultra,”
unless he has a mind to prove that Mr. W. is an horse.
18. “I expect you will tell me that I have exposed Mr.
W., particularly in the foregoing contrast. That Mr. W. is
exposed, I allow; but that I have exposed him, I deny.”
Who was it then? Why, “out of his own mouth all that I
have brought against him proceeds.”
Not so: All that I have wrote, except one sentence out of
an hundred and one, is well consistent with itself, provided
the words be taken in their plain, natural sense, and one
part of them in connexion with the other. But whoever will
use Mr. H.’s art of twisting and torturing words, may make
them say anything, and extract Pelagianism, Arianism, or
anything he pleases, out of anything that can be spoken. By
this art, he that cries out against Mr. F.’s art has found, that
is, created, above an hundred contradictions in my works,
and “could find abundance more.” Ay, five hundred; under
his forming hand contradictions spring up as quick as mush
rooms. And he that reads only (as is the manner of a thou
sand readers) the running title at the top of each page,—
2 D 2
404 REMARKS ON
For election, Against election,
For sinless perfection, Against sinless perfection,
For imputed righteousness, Against imputed righteous
ness, -
and so on, will readily say, “What a heap of contradictions—
flat, palpable contradictions—is here!” Here! Where? “Why,
at the top of every page.” True; and there lies the strength
of the cause. The propositions themselves are plain enough;
but neither Mr. H. nor any man living can prove them.
19. But, if so, if all this laboured contrast be only the
work of a creative imagination, what has Mr. H., the cat’s
paw of a party, been doing all this time? Has he not been
abundantly “doing evil, that good might come,” that the
dear decree of reprobation might stand? Has he not been
“saying all manner of evil falsely;” pouring out slander like
water, a first, a second, a third time, against one that never
willingly offended him? And what recompence can he make
(be his opinions right or wrong) for having so deeply injured
me, without any regard either to mercy or truth? If he (not
I myself) has indeed exposed me in so unjust and inhuman a
manner, what amends can he make, as a Christian and a
gentleman, to God, to me, or to the world? Can he gather
up the foul, poisonous water which he has so abundantly
poured out? If he still insists he has done me no wrong, he
has only spoken “the truth in love;” if he is resolved at all
hazards to fight it out, I will meet him on his own ground.
Waving all things else, I fix on this point: “Is that scurrilous
hotch-potch, which he calls a ‘Farrago, true or false?” Will
he defend or retract it? An hundred and one propositions
are produced as mine, which are affirmed to contradict other
propositions of mine. Do I in these hundred and one
instances contradict myself, or do I not? Observe: The
question is, whether I contradict myself; not whether I con
tradict somebody else; be it Mr. Baxter, Goodwin, Fletcher,
the “Christian Library,” or even my own brother: These are
not myself. “Nay, but you have published them.” If I
publish them ten times over, still they are not myself. I
insist upon it, that no man’s words but my own can ever prove
that I contradict myself. Now, if Mr. H. scorns to yield, let him
fall to work, and prove by my own words, that I contradict
myself (that is the present question) in these hundred instances.
If he can prove this, I am a blunderer; I must plead Guilty to
MR. HILL’s REVIEw. 405
the charge. If he cannot, he is one of the most cruel and
inhuman slanderers that ever set pen to paper.
20. I bless God, that the words cited from the sermon on
“A Catholic Spirit” do quite “come to myself,” not indeed
as I am painted by Mr. Hill, but as I really am. From the
year 1738, I have not been “unsettled as to any fundamental
doctrine of the gospel.” No, not in one; I am as clear of
this charge, as of that wonderful one advanced in the note,
page 146: “Though this Sermon be entitled ‘Catholic Spirit,'
yet it inculcates an attendance upon one only congregation;
in other words, Hear me, and those I send out, and no one
else.” Mr. Hill himself knows better; he knows I advise all
of the Church to hear the parish Minister. I do not advise
even Dissenters of any kind, not to hear their own Teachers.
But I advise all, Do not “heap to yourselves Preachers,
having itching ears.” Do not run hither and thither to hear
every new thing, else you will be established in nothing.
“However, it is by stratagems of this sort, that he holds so
many souls in his shackles, and prevents them from coming
to the knowledge of all the glorious truths of the gospel.”
Observe, gospel is with Mr. Hill the same as Calvinism.
So where he says, “There is no gospel,” he means no predes
tination. By the same figure of speech, some of his admirers
used to say, “There is no honey in the book.” Here lies the
core; this is the wrong, for which the bigots of this gospel
will never forgive me. And all those are such, who “rank
all election-doubters among Diabolonians.” Such is Mr.
Hill, a bigot in grain, while he sets his hand to that gentle
sentence. Nay, further, says he, “I cannot help informing
my readers,” (no, if he did, he must burst,) “that in the
life of Mr. Philip Henry, published in his ‘Christian Library,’
he has artfully left out Mr. Henry's Confession of Faith.”
Artfully / No; honestly; according to the open profession
in the preface cited before.
21. Yet Mr. Hill, this Mr. Hill, says to Mr. Fletcher, “Suf
fer not bitter words and calumnious expressions to disguise
themselves under the appearance of plainness.” (Page 147.)
Bitter words! Can Mr. Hill imagine there is any harm in
these? Mr. Hill that cites the judicious Mr. Toplady! that
admires the famous “Eleven Letters,” which are bitterness
double distilled ! which overflow with little else but calum
nious expressions from the beginning to the end I Mr. Hill
406 REMARKS ON
that himself wrote the “Review,” and the “Farrago!” And
does he complain of Mr. Fletcher's bitterness? Why, he
may be a little bitter; but not Mr. Fletcher. Altering the
person alters the thing! “If it was your bull that gored
mine,” says the judge in the fable, “that is another case !”
22. Two objections to my personal conduct, I have now
briefly to consider: First, “Mr. Wesley embraced Mr. Shirley
as a friend at the Conference, and then directly went out to
give the signal for war.” (Page 150.) This is partly true.
It is true, that, although I was not ignorant of his having
deeply injured me, yet I freely forgave him at the Conference,
and again “embraced him as a friend.” But it is not true,
that I “directly went out to give the signal for war.” “Nay,
why else did you consent to the publishing of Mr. Fletcher's
Letters?” Because I judged it would be an effectual means
of undoing the mischief which Mr. Shirley had done: Not
that I am now sorry (though I was) for what he has done, for
his publication of that bitter Circular Letter: For 1 now
clearly discern the hand of God throughout that whole affair.
Both my brother and I still indulged the fond hope of living
in peace with our warm Calvinist brethren; but we now give
it up; our eyes are open; we see what we have to expect.
We look for neither mercy nor justice at their hands; if we
find any, it will be clear gains.
23. The Second objection is, “Mr. Wesley acknowledged
the unguarded manner in which the Minutes were drawn up;
and yet immediately after defended them.” I answer, How
did I “acknowledge the unguarded manner?” The plain
case was this: I seek peace, and would do anything for it,
which I can with a safe conscience. On this principle it was,
that when Mr. Shirley read over his Declaration, (I say his; for
it was he drew it up, not I,) and asked, if we agreed thereto,
I was heartily desirous to agree with him as far as possible.
In order to this, after altering some words, I asked our
brethren, if they were willing to sign it. One immediately
said, “The Minutes are not unguarded; they are guarded
enough.” I said, “They are guarded enough for you; but
not for those who seek occasion against us.” And observe,
it is only in this sense, that I subscribed to that expression.
But I will not affirm, that my love of peace did not carry me
a little too far. I know not but it would have been better,
not to have signed the paper at all.
MR. HILL's REVIEw. 407
24. So much for the Minutes. Perhaps it may be expected,
that I should also take some notice of what Mr. Hill says
concerning perfection. All his arguments indeed, and ten
times more, I have answered over and over. But if it is
required, I will answer once more; only premising, by that
perfection, to which St. Paul directs Mr. Hill and me to go
on, (Heb. vi. 1) I understand meither more nor less, than
what St. John terms “perfect love;” (1 John iv. 18;) and our
Lord, “loving the Lord our God with all our heart, and mind,
and soul, and strength.” If you choose to call this “sinful
perfection,” (rather than sinless,) you have my free leave.
Mr. Hill’s main argument against this is, that “it is
Popish doctrine.” How does this appear? O, “Luther
says so.” (Page 25.) This will not do; it is only second
hand evidence. “It crept into the Church first in the fifth
century, and has been since almost generally received in the
Church of Rome.” (Page 49.) How is this proved? either
that the doctrine of perfect love crept first into the Church in
the fifth century? or, that it has been since almost generally
received in the Church of Rome? Why, “we may very
readily perceive this, by the following extract from Bishop
Cowper.” I answer, (1.) This is but second-hand evidence
still. (2.) It is wide of the mark. For this whole extract
says not a word about the Church of Rome. It contains only
a few citations from St. Augustine and St. Bernard, foreign
to the present question; and one from St. Ambrose, if it be
possible, more foreign still. None of these touch either of
the points in question: “This doctrine crept into the Church
in the fifth century;” or, “It has been (ever) since almost
generally received in the Church of Rome.”
Here I must beg leave to put Mr. Hill in mind of one
stated rule in controversy: We are to take no authorities at
second-hand, but always recur to the originals. Consequently,
words of St. Bernard, or twenty Saints more, copied from
Bishop Cowper, prove just nothing. Before we can urge the
authority of St. Bernard or Ambrose, we must consult the
authors themselves, and tell our readers what edition we use,
with the page where the words are found; otherwise they
cannot form a judgment either of the fairness of the quota
tion, or of the sense and weight of it.
Hitherto, then, we have not one tittle of proof, that this
is a Popish doctrine; that it ever was, or is now, “almost
408 R.EMARKS ON
generally received in the Church of Rome;” (although, if it
had, this would be no conclusive argument against it, as
neither is it conclusive against the doctrine of the blessed
Trinity;) I do not know that it ever was: But this I know;
it has been solemnly condemned by the Church of Rome. It
has been condemned by the Pope and his whole conclave,
even in this present century. In the famous bull Unigenitus,
(so called from the first words, Unigenitus Dei filius,') they
utterly condemn the uninterrupted act (of faith and love,
which some then talked of, of continually rejoicing, praying,
and giving thanks) as dreadful heresy Now, in what public
act of the Church of Rome is the doctrine of perfection
maintained? Till this is produced, I pray let us hear no
more, that perfection is a Popish doctrine.
25. However, “the distinction between sins and innocent
infirmities is derived from the Romish Church.” (Page 56.)
How does this appear? Thus: “Two of her devoted cham
pions, Lindenus and Andradius, distinguish between infirmi
ties and sins.” Lindenus and Andradius / Who are they?
From what country did they come? I do not know the men.
One of them, for aught I know, might serve as an interpreter
at the Council of Trent? What then? Was he an autho
rized interpreter of the doctrines of the Church? Nay, and
how do you know that they did speak of “little, trifling
faults,” or of “minute and trivial sins?” Did you ever read
them? Pray, what edition of their works do you use? and
in what page do these words occur? Till we know this, that
there may be an opportunity of examining the books, (though
I fear scarce worth examining,) it is doing too much honour
to such quotations, to take any notice of them at all.
26. Well, now for the buskins ! Now, spirat tragicum
satis '+ “And this is the doctrine which is preached to
more than thirty thousand souls, of which Mr. W. has the
charge. Then I am sure it is high time, that not only the
Calvinist Ministers, but all that wish well to the interest of
Protestantism,” (so Mr. S. said before,) “should, in a body,
protest against such licentious tenets.” “Blow ye the
trumpet in Sion l’” Gird on your armour ! Make ye your
selves ready for battle ! Again the trumpet sounds:—A
* The only-begotten Son of God.–ED 1 T.
+ This quotation from Horace is thus translated by Francis :
“It breathes the spirit of the tragic scene.”—ED1T.
MR. HILL's REVIEw. 409
crusadel An holy war! Down with the heretics! But hold !
What spirit are you of ? Are you followers of peace? Then
“bring forth your strong reasons; speak the truth in love,”
and we are ready to meet you. But really all this talk of my
licentious doctrine is a mere copy of Mr. H.’s countenance.
He knows, and all in England know, (whoever have heard
my name,) that it is not too loose, but too strict, doctrine I
am constantly accused of. Therefore, all this bluster, about
my superseding the law, has not only no truth, but no colour,
no plausibility. And when Mr. H. calls so gravely for Dr.
Crisp to “sweep away all my Antinomian rubbish,” shall we
laugh or weep?
Cuivis facilis rigidi censura cachinni.*
Rather let us drop a tear on human infirmity.
27. So much for the First grand argument against perfec
tion, that it is “generally received in the Church of Rome.”
The Second is: “It was generally received among the
ranting Anabaptists in Germany.” (Page 49.) What author
of note testifies this? I allow no second-hand authority;
but desire to know what German historian of credit has
recorded it; and in what page of his works. When this is
ascertained, then we may observe, it proves just nothing.
A Third argument against perfection is, that “it was main
tained by many wild Ranters in London.” Wild enough !
although no stress is to be laid on Mr. H.’s informations
concerning them; some of which are altogether false, and
the rest imperfect enough. But suppose they were all true,
what would follow? Many hearers abusing the doctrines I
teach, no more prove that those doctrines are false, than the
German Ranters proved that Luther's were so.
28. Is it another argument, that “the monstrous doctrine
of perfection turns some of its deluded votaries into monsters?
This may be proved from the cases of Bell and Harris; the
former of whom prophesied that the world would be at an
end the last of February; the latter was seized with raving
madness, and died blaspheming in a most dreadful manner.”
(Page 44.)
It would be strange if George Bell were not brought upon
the stage, as he has been an hundred times over. As for
* This quotation from Juvenal is thus rendered by Mr. Madan :
“The censure of a severe laugh is easy to any one.”-ED1 r.
410 REMARKS ON
poor Benjamin Harris, I believe, as a punishment for his
pride and uncharitableness, God permitted him to be struck
in an instant with diabolical madness. But it did not con
tinue to his death; he did not die blaspheming. I saw him
myself quiet and composed; and be calmly delivered up his
soul to God.
See another instance: “A friend of mine lately informed
me that an eminent Preacher of perfection told him, that he
had not sinned for some years, and that the Holy Ghost
had descended and sat on him and many others in a visible
manner, as he did upon the Apostles on the day of Pentecost.”
Please to name the man; otherwise an hundred such tales
will weigh nothing with men of sense and candour.
Behold a Fourth: “Last year I myself conversed with a
gentlewoman of such high perfection, that she said, no man
could teach her anything, and went to no place of worship
for years together: However, she was a scold, and beat her
maid.” Perhaps so. And what is that to me? If she is a
member of our society, tell me her name; and she will be in
it no longer. This is our glorying. It must be, that many
members of our society will, from time to time, grow weary
of well-doing; yea, that some will fall into sin. But as soon
as this appears, they have no more place among us. We
regard no man’s person, high or low, rich or poor. A
disorderly walker cannot continue with us.
Again: “One told God in prayer, that she was perfect, as
God himself was perfect. Another prayed, ‘Grant, O Lord,
that all here present may be perfect, as I am perfect.’”
(Page 45.) Till you name the men, this, too, must go for
nothing. But suppose it all true, what will it prove? Only
that there are madmen in the world.
“I could also tell him of a woman, who was so perfect,
that she tried to sin, and could not.” Pray name her.
“Mr. W. must also well remember a certain perfect married
lady, who was got with child by a perfect Preacher.” I do
not remember any such thing. I never heard of it before.
29. But “I hate,” says Mr. H., “the law of retaliation;”—
truly one would not have thought it;—“ and would not have
mentioned these things, but that you set me the example,”
that is, but by way of retaliation. “Should you doubt the
truth of these instances, I will lead you to the fountain-head
of my intelligence.” That will not do. In order to be even
~
*
*
:
Ż
k
MR. HILL's REv1Ew. 411
with Mr. F., you have told seven shocking stories. Several
of these I know to be false; I doubt if any, but that of George
Bell, be true. And now you offer to lead Mr. F. to the
fountain-head of your intelligence 1 Probably to one or two
renegade Methodists, who court the world by slandering their
brethren | “But Mr. W. adopts this way.” No, never. In
my Letter to Mr. Hervey, I occasionally name two famous
men; but I do not slander them. In my Journals, I name
several others. This is above board; but Mr. H. stabs in the
dark. He gives us no names, no places of abode; but casts
arrows and firebrands abroad; and, let them light where
they may, on guilty or guiltless, of that he takes no care.
30. It remains only, to consider the queries which Mr. H.
addresses directly to me:—
(1.) “Did not you, in administering the sacrament, a few
years ago, to a perfect society in West-Street chapel, leave
out the Confession ?”
Yes, and many times since. When I am straitened for
time, (as I generally am there on a Monday,) I begin the
Communion-service at, “We do not presume to come to this
thy table.” One Monday, Mr. Madan desired to stay.
Here, I suppose, is “the fountain-head of this intelligence.”
(2.) “Did not one of the enthusiasts then say, he had
heard a voice telling him, he was all holiness to the Lord?”
Possibly so; but I remember nothing of it.
(3.) “Did not a second declare the same thing?”
Not that I remember.
(4) “Did not George Bell say, he should never die?”
He often did, if not then.
(5) “Did not one present confirm it?”
Not unlikely ; but I do not remember it.
(6.) “Did not another perfect brother say, he believed the
millennium was near; for there had been more Constables
sworn in that year than heretofore?”
Are you sure he was a perfect brother; that is, one that
professed so to be As for me, I can say nothing about it;
for I neither remember the man nor the words.
“This I have put down verbatim from the mouth of a
judicious friend then present; but from that time he has
been heartily sick of sinless perfection.” Say of “perfect
love.”
Is it only from that time that Mr. Madan has been sick
|- I
412 REMARKS ON
of it? Was he not sick of it before? And did he then, or
at any time since, say one word to me of any of these
things? No; but he treasured them up for ten years; and
then tells Mr. Hill, that he might tell them to all the world.
(7) “Do not you know a Clergvman, once closely connected
with you, who refused a great witness for perfection the
sacrament, because he had been detected in bed with a perfect
sister?” No; I never heard of it before. Surely Mr. M d
is not fallen so low, as to invent such a tale as this !
I need not say anything to your last anecdote, since you
(for once 1) put a candid construction upon my words. If
I did speak them, which I can neither affirm nor deny,
undoubtedly my meaning was, (as yourself observe,) “Though
I have been holding forth the imputed righteousness of
Christ to a mixed congregation, yet I think it right to
caution you of the society how you abuse that doctrine,
which to some, who turn it into licentiousness, is a smooth
doctrine, of which you ought to beware.” (Page 61.) But
your friend, it seems, who gave you this account, did not put
so candid a construction on my words.
You say, “He was so struck, as hardly to refrain from
speaking to you in the chapel. And from that hour he gave
up all connexions with you.” That is, he sought a pretence;
and he found one !
And now, what does all this amount to? Several persons,
who professed high things, degenerated into pride and
enthusiasm, and then talked like lunatics, about the time
that they renounced connexion with me for mildly reproving
them. And is this any objection against the existence of
that love which they professed, nay, and I verily believe,
once enjoyed? though they were afterward “moved from
their steadfastness.” Surely no more than a justified person’s
running mad, is an objection against justification. Every
doctrine must stand or fall by the Bible. If the perfection
I teach agree with this, it will stand, in spite of all the
enthusiasts in the world; if not, it cannot stand.
31. I now look back on a train of incidents that have
occurred for many months last past, and adore a wise and
gracious Providence, ordering all things well ! When the
Circular Letter was first dispersed throughout Great Britain
and Ireland, I did not conceive the immense good which God
was about to bring out of that evil. But no sooner did Mr.
MR. HILL's REVIEw. 413
F.’s first Letters appear, than the scene began to open. And
the design of Providence opened more and more, when Mr.
S.’s Narrative, and Mr. H.’s Letters, constrained him to
write and publish his Second and Third Check to Antino
mianism. It was then indisputably clear, that neither my
brother nor I had borne a sufficient testimony to the truth.
For many years, from a well-meant, but ill-judged, tender
ness, we had suffered the reprobation Preachers (vulgarly
called Gospel Preachers) to spread their poison, almost
without opposition. But at length they have awakened us
out of sleep; Mr. H. has answered for all his brethren, roundly
declaring, that “any agreement with election-doubters is a
covenant with death.” It is well: We are now forewarned
and fore-armed. We look for neither peace nor truce with
any who do not openly and expressly renounce this diabolical
sentiment. But since God is on our side, we will not fear
what man can do unto us. We never before saw our way
clear, to do any more than act on the defensive. But since
the Circular Letter has sounded the alarm, has called forth
all their hosts to war; and since Mr. H. has answered the
call, drawing the sword, and throwing away the scabbard;
what remains, but to own the hand of God, and make a
virtue of necessity? I will no more desire any Arminian, so
called, to remain only on the defensive. Rather chase the
fiend, Reprobation, to his own hell, and every doctrine con
nected with it. Let none pity or spare one limb of either
speculative or practical Antinomianism; or of any doctrine
that naturally tends thereto, however veiled under the specious
name of free grace;—only remembering, that however we
are treated by men, who have a dispensation from the vulgar
rules of justice and mercy, we are not to fight them at their
own weapons, to return railing for railing. Those who plead
the cause of the God of love, are to imitate Him they serve;
and, however provoked, to use no other weapons than those
of truth and love, of Scripture and reason.
32. Having now answered the queries you proposed, suffer
me, Sir, to propose one to you; the same which a gentleman
of your own opinion proposed to me some years since: “Sir,
how is it that as soon as a man comes to the knowledge of the
truth, it spoils his temper?” That it does so, I had observed
over and over, as well as Mr. J. had. But how can we
account for it? Has the truth (so Mr. J. termed what many
414 REMARKs on MR. HILL's REVIEw.
love to term the doctrine of free grace) a natural tendency to
spoil the temper? to inspire pride, haughtiness, supercilious
ness? to make a man “wiser in his own eyes, than seven
men that can render a reason ?” Does it naturally turn a
man into a cynic, a bear, a Toplady? Does it at once set
him free from all the restraints of good nature, decency, and
good manners? Cannot a man hold distinguishing grace, as
it is called, but he must distinguish himself for passion,
sourness, bitterness? Must a man, as soon as he looks upon
himself to be an absolute favourite of Heaven, look upon all
that oppose him as Diabolonians, as predestinated dogs of
hell? Truly, the melancholy instance now before us would
almost induce us to think so. For who was of a more amiable
temper than Mr. Hill, a few years ago? When I first
conversed with him in London, I thought I had seldom seen
a man of fortune who appeared to be of a more humble,
modest, gentle, friendly disposition. And yet this same Mr.
H., when he has once been grounded in “the knowledge of
the truth,” is of a temper as totally different from this, as
light is from darkness | He is now haughty, supercilious,
disdaining his opponents as unworthy to be set with the dogs
of his flock | He is violent, impetuous, bitter of spirit ! in a
word, the author of the Review !
O Sir, what a commendation is this of your doctrine !
Look at Mr. H., the Arminian the loving, amiable, generous,
friendly man. Look at Mr. H., the Calvinist! Is it the
same person? this spiteful, morose, touchy man? Alas,
what has “the knowledge of the truth” done? What a
deplorable change has it made | Sir, I love you still; though
I cannot esteem you as I did once. Let me entreat you, if
not for the honour of God, yet for the honour of your cause,
avoid, for the time to come, all anger, all spite, all sourness
and bitterness; all contemptuous usage of your opponents,
not inferior to you, unless in fortune. “O put on again
bowels of mercies, kindness, gentleness, long-suffering;
endeavouring to hold,” even with them that differ from you
in opinion, the “unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace l”
BRIsToL,
September 9, 1772.
SOME REMARKS
ON
MR. HILL’S “FARRAGO DOUBLE-DISTILLED.”
“If it be possible, as much as lieth in you, live peaceably with all men.”
Romans xii. 18.
1. IT is far from my design to give a particular answer to
everything contained in Mr. Hill’s late treatise. I intend
only to offer to the impartial reader a few cursory remarks,
which may partly explain and partly confirm what I have
already said upon the subject.
2. “Poor Mr. Wesley,” says Mr. Hill, opening his cause
with native eloquence, “has published various tracts, out of
which Mr. Hill collects above an hundred gross contradictions.
At this Mr. W.’s temper is much ruffled; ” (I believe not;
I am not sensible of it;) “he primes, cocks, and fires at
Calvinism; and there is smoke and fire in plenty. But if
you can bear the stench, (which indeed is very nauseous,)
there is no danger of being wounded. He calls this last
cannon, or pop-gun, “Remarks’ on my Review. Men of
sense say, it is quite unfit for duty; men of grace compas
sionate the caster of it; men of pleasantry laugh heartily at
it; but some good old women speak highly of it.” (Pages
3—5.) I give this passage at some length, as a genuine
specimen of Mr. Hill's manner of writing.
3. But as Mr. Hill did not “choose to prefix his name, it
argued no great proof of Mr. W.’s politeness, to address him
in the personal manner he has done.” Which of us began?
Was it not Mr. Hill? Did not he address me in a personal
manner first? And some, beside the old women, are of
opinion, he did not do it in the politest manner in the world.
4. “Mr. W. would have us know, that his piece is written
in much love. But what love? Love to his own incon
sistencies; love of scolding, love of abuse. Let the reader
416 REMARKS ON MR. HILL’s
find out any other sort of love through the whole performance.”
In order to judge whether I wrote in love or no, let any one
read the words he has picked out of fifty-four pages, just as
they stand connected with others in each page; it will then
appear they are not contrary either to love or meekness.
5. But Mr. W. says, Mr. Hill “is unworthy the name
either of the gentleman or the Christian; and is amazed that
Mr. Hill should lay claim to either of those titles.” (Page 6.)
Not so. It is my belief that Mr. Hill is both a gentleman
and a Christian; though I still think, in his treatment of
Mr. Fletcher and me, he has acted beneath his character.
Yet it is very likely, “a friend of yours” (not mine) “might
say, I wrote in much wrath.” (Page 7.) I wrote then in
just as much wrath as I do now; though your friend might
think otherwise.
6. Nay, but Mr. W. “gives all the Calvinist Ministers
the most scurrilous, Billingsgate language, while he is
trumpeting forth his own praises, in Mr. F.’s ‘Second Check
to Antinomianism.’” (Page 8.) - A small mistake. I do not
give Billingsgate language to any one: I have not so learned
Christ. Every one of those Hymns, out of which Mr. Hill
culls the harshest expressions, are not mine, but my brother’s.
Neither do I trumpet forth my own praises. Mr. Hill's
imagining I do, arises from an innocent mistake. He con
tinually takes for granted that I read over and correct all
Mr. F.’s books before they go to the press. So far from it,
that the “Fourth Check to Antinomianism” I have not read
over to this day. But Mr. W. “thinks himself to be the
greatest Minister in the world.” Exceedingly far from it. I
know many now in England, at whose feet I desire to be
found in the day of the Lord Jesus.
7. To that question, “Why does a man fall upon me, because
another gave him a good beating?” Mr. Hill answers, “If your
trumpet had not given the alarm, we should not have prepared
ourselves for the battle.” (Page 53.) Nay, truly, not mine, but
Mr. Shirley’s. I was sitting quietly in my study, on the other
side of St. George's channel, when his trumpet gave the alarm.
Yet I say again, I am not now sorry for these disputes, though
I was sorry. You say, truly, “Mr. W.’s temper has been
manifested” hereby. (Page 56.) Let all candid men judge
between us, whether Mr. F. and I, on the one hand, or Mr. Hill
on the other, has shown more “meekness and lowliness;” and
2
*
%
;
;
FARRAGO DOUBLE-DISTILLED, 417
which of us has expressed the greatest heat, and the most
cordial contempt of his opponent.
Mr. H. adds: “Hereby Mr. Charles Wesley's Calvinism
is exposed by Mr. John.” Then that is exposed which
never existed; for he never was a Calvinist yet. And
“hereby,” Mr. H. says, “the ‘Christian Library’ is given
up as nothing.” Mere finesse ! Every one sees my meaning,
but those that will not see it: It is nothing to your purpose;
it proves nothing of what it is brought to prove. In the
same sense I set the word nothing over against the citations
from Mr. Baxter and Goodwin.
8. If Mr. Hill says he always was a Calvinist, I have no
right to contradict him. But I am sure he was of a widely
different temper from that he has shown in his late writings.
I allow much to his belief, that, in exposing me to the
utmost of his power, he is doing God service. Yet I must
needs say, if I were writing against a Turk or a Pagan, I
durst not use him as Mr. Hill does me. And if I really am
(which will one day appear) employing all my time, and
labour, and talents (such as they are) for this single end, that
the kingdom of Christ may be set up on earth; then He
whom I serve in the gospel of his Son, will not commend him
for his present work.
9. But what makes Mr. Hill so warm against me? I still
believe it is for this chiefly,—because I am an Arminian, an
election-doubter. For, says he, the “good old Preacher
places all election-doubters” (that is, those who are not clear
in the belief of absolute predestination) “among the numerous
hosts of the Diabolonians. One of these being brought
before the Judge, the Judge tells him he must die.” (Review,
page 35.) That is, plainly, he must die eternally for this
damnable sin. I beg Mr. Hill to explain himself on this
head. Does he still subscribe to the sentence of this “good
old Preacher?” Are all election-doubters to be placed
among the Diabolonians? Is the sentence irreversibly passed,
that they must all die eternally? I must insist on Mr. Hill’s
answering this question : If not, silence gives consent.
10. Mr. H. farther affirms: “The only cement of Christian
union is the love of God. And the foundation of that love
must be laid, in believing the truths of God;” (that is, you
must believe particular redemption, or it is impossible you
should love God;) for, to use “the words of Dr. Owen, in his
VOL. X. E E
-
4.18 REMARKs on MR. HILL’s
‘Display of Arminianism,’” (see what truths Mr. H. means,)
“‘an agreement without truth is no peace, but a covenant
with death, and a conspiracy against the kingdom of Christ.’”
(Page 39.) Here again I beg an explicit answer. Will Mr.
H. affirm this in cool blood P If he will, there needs no more
to account for his enmity both to me and the Minutes.
“Nay, but the foundation is struck at by those wretched
Minutes.” (Page 52.) True, the foundation of Calvinism.
So I observed before. I know it well. If the Minutes stand,
Calvinism falls. But Mr. Hill says, “The doctrines of election
and perseverance are very little, indeed scarcely at all, dwelt
on in the ‘Review.’” Now, I think they are very much
dwelt on therein, and desire any that have eyes to judge.
11. We come now to the main question: Is the “Farrago”
true or false? I aver it to be totally false; except in one
single article, out of an hundred and one. I mean, Mr. H.
has not proved that I contradict myself, except in that single
instance. To come to particulars:—
I.
“1. There was an ever- “There never was such a
lasting covenant between the covenant.”
Father and Son, concerning
man’s redemption.”
The former proposition is taken from the “Christian
Library;” on which Mr. H. says again, “Mr. W. affirms that
the Christian Library is “all true, all agreeable to the word of
God.’” I answered before, “I do not. My words are: ‘I
have endeavoured to extract such a collection of English
divinity, as I believe is all true, all agreeable to the oracles of
God.” (Christian Library, preface, p. 4.) I did believe, and
do believe, every tract therein to be true and agreeable to the
oracles of God. But I do not roundly affirm this of every
sentence contained in the fifty volumes. I could not possibly
affirm it, for two reasons: (1.) I was obliged to prepare most
of those tracts for the press, just as I could snatch time in
travelling; not transcribing them, (none expected it of me,)
but only marking the lines with my pen, and altering a few
words here and there, as I had mentioned in the preface.
(2.) As it was not in my power to attend to the press, that
care necessarily devolved on others; through whose inattention
an hundred passages were left in, which I had scratched out.
FARRAGO DOUBLE-DISTILLED. 419
It is probable too, that I myself might overlook some
sentences which were not suitable to my own principles. It
is certain the correctors of the press did this in not a few
instances. The plain inference is, if there are an hundred
passages in the ‘Christian Library’ which contradict any or
all of my doctrines, these are no proofs that I contradict
myself. Be it observed once for all, therefore, citations from
the ‘Christian Library’ prove nothing but the carelessness of
the correctors.” (Remarks, page 381.)
12. Yet Mr. Hill, as if he had never seen a word of this,
or had solidly refuted it, gravely tells us again, “If Mr. W.
may be credited, the ‘Farrago’ is all true; part of it being
taken out of his own ‘Christian Library, in the preface of
which he tells us that the contents are ‘all true, all agreeable
to the oracles of God.” Therefore, every single word of it is
his own, either by birth or adoption.” (Farrago, p. 12.) No ;
I never adopted, I could not adopt, “every single word” of
the “Christian Library.” It was impossible I should have
such a thought, for the reasons above mentioned.
But “there is very great evasion,” says Mr. H., “in
Mr. W.’s saying that though he believes “every tract to be
true, yet he will not be answerable for “every sentence
or expression in the Christian Library;” whereas the matter
by no means rests upon a few sentences or expressions, but
upon whole treatises, which are diametrically opposite to
Mr. W.’s present tenets; particularly the treatises of Dr.
Sibbs, Dr. Preston, Bishop Beveridge, and Dr. Owen on
indwelling sin.” (Page 16.)
13. Just before, Mr. H. affirmed, “Every single word in
the ‘Christian Library’ is his own.” Beaten out of this
hold, he retreats to another; but it is as untenable as the
former: “The matter,” he says, “does not rest on a few
sentences; whole treatises are diametrically opposite to his
present tenets.” He instances in the works of Dr. Sibbs,
Preston, Beveridge, and a treatise of Dr. Owen’s.
I join issue with him on this point. Here I pin him down.
The works of Dr. Preston and Sibbs are in the ninth and
tenth volumes of the Library; that treatise of Dr. Owen's in
the seventeenth; that of Bishop Beveridge in the forty
seventh. Take which of them you please; suppose the last,
Bishop Beveridge’s “Thoughts upon Religion.” Is this whole
treatise “ diametrically opposite to my present tenets?” The
420 REMARKS ON MR. HILL’s
“Resolutions” take up the greatest part of the book; every
sentence of which exactly agrees with my present judgment;
as do at least nine parts in ten of the preceding “Thoughts,”
on which those Resolutions are formed. Now, what could
possibly induce a person of Mr. Hill’s character, a man of a good
understanding, and of a generous temper, a well-bred gentle
man, and a serious Christian, to violate all the rules of justice
and truth, which at other times he so earnestly defends, by
positively, deliberately, roundly asserting so entire a falsehood,
merely to blacken one who loves his person, who esteems his
character, and is ready to serve him in anything within his
power? What, but so violent an attachment to his opinion,
as, while that is in danger, suspends all his faculties, so that
he neither can feel, nor think, nor speak like himself?
14. In the ninth and tenth volumes are two treatises of
Dr. Preston's,—“The Breastplate of Faith and Love,” and
“The New Covenant.” Is either of these “diametrically
opposite to my present tenets?” . By no means. If a few
sentences here and there (and this I only suppose, not grant)
were carelessly left in, though I had scratched them out,
which seem (perhaps only seem) to contradict them, these
are not the whole tracts; the general tenor of which I still
heartily subscribe to.
The tenth volume likewise contains two sermons of Dr.
Sibbs’s, and his tract upon Solomon’s Song. Are any of
these “diametrically opposite to my present tenets?” No
more than those of Dr. Preston’s. I as willingly as ever
subscribe to these also.
Is Dr. Owen’s tract, “Of the Remainder of Indwelling Sin
in Believers,” “diametrically opposite to my present tenets?”
So far from it, that a few years since I published a sermon on
the very same subject. I hope there is no room to charge
me with “quirk, quibble, artifice, evasion,” on this head;
(though I believe as much as on any other;) I use only plain,
manly reasoning; and such logic I am not ashamed to avow
before the whole learned world.
15. But “I will go farther still,” says Mr. H. : “Let Mr.
W. only bring me twenty lines together, out of the writings
of those four eminent Divines, as they stand in the ‘Chris
tian Library;’ and I will engage to prove that he has twenty
times contradicted them in some of his other publications.”
(Page 19.) Agreed: I bring him the following twenty lines
FARRAGO DOURLE-DISTILLED. 421
with which Dr. Preston begins his treatise called “The New
Covenant:”—
“These words of God to Abraham contain a precept of
sincerity, or perfect walking with God: ‘Walk before me,
and be thou perfect:’ And also the motive thereunto, God’s
all-sufficiency: “I am God all-sufficient. As if he should
say, ‘If there were any defect in me, if thou didst need or
couldest desire anything that were not to be had in me, and
thou mightest have it elsewhere, perhaps thy heart might be
imperfect in walking towards me. Thou mightest then step
out from me, to take in advantages elsewhere. But seeing I
am all-sufficient; since I have enough in me to fulfil all thy
desires; since I am every way an adequate object, so that all
thy soul can wish for thou mayest have in me; why then
shouldest thou not consecrate thyself to me? Why then
shouldest thou be uneven in thy ways, serving me sometimes,
and sometimes the creature? For there is nothing in the
creature, but thou may est find in me.’ ‘I am all-sufficient;
therefore, walk before me, and be thou perfect!’” (Christian
Library, Vol. X., page 47.)
Here are exactly twenty lines, neither more nor less,
“as they stand in the ‘Christian Library.’” Now, fulfil
your engagement; prove that I “have twenty times contra
dicted them in some other of my publications.” If you
cannot, acknowledge you have done me wrong. In the heat
of your resentment, you have undertaken what you are not
able to perform; you have spoken rashly and unadvisedly;
you have gone much too far, far beyond the bounds of
wisdom as well as of love.
16. Nay, but “I will go one step farther yet: I defy Mr.
Wesley to bring me twenty lines out of the above tracts, by
Preston, Sibbs, Owen, and Beveridge, which he now believes.”
Is it possible, that Mr. Hill should believe himself, while he
is talking at this rate? Or does he expect that any one else
should believe him, unless he be drunk with passion or
prejudice? Was ever anything so wild? But I accept of
this challenge, and that with more seriousness than it deserves.
I will go no farther than the twenty lines cited above: All
these I “now believe.” And I believe, as I said before, not
only the whole treatise from which those words are taken,
but the tenor of the whole “Christian Library.”
Meantime, it has been acknowledged again and again,
422 REMARKs on MR. Hill's
that several sentences stand therein which I had put out, in
my usual manner, by drawing my pen through them. Be it
observed, therefore, once more, that those passages prove
nothing but the carelessness of the correctors; consequently,
all the pains bestowed to collect them together, whether by
Mr. Hill or his coadjutors, is absolutely lost labour, and
never can prove that I contradict myself.
17. The case is nearly the same with regard to those other
tracts which I published many years ago,-Mr. Baxter's
Aphorisms on Justification, and John Goodwin’s tract on
the same subject. I have lately read them both over with all
the attention I am capable of; and I still believe they contain
the true Scripture doctrine concerning justification by faith:
But it does not follow, that I am accountable for every
sentence contained in either of those treatises.
“But does Mr. Wesley believe the doctrine therein con
tained, or does he not?” I do; and John Goodwin believed
the doctrine contained in the sermon on “The Lord our
Righteousness;” the sum of which is, “We are justified,
sanctified, and glorified, for the sake of what Christ has done
and suffered for us.” Nothing he asserts is inconsistent with
this; though it may be inconsistent with passages left in the
“Christian Library.” When therefore I write “Nothing”
against those passages, or the extracts from Goodwin, that con
tradict them, this does not prove, (as Mr. Hill archly says,)
that “I have nothing to say,” but that all those passages and
extracts put together are nothing to the purpose. For, were
it true, that John Goodwin and Richard Baxter contradicted
all those passages, it is nothing to the point in hand; it
never can prove, that I, John Wesley, contradict myself.
18. But to return to the everlasting covenant: “Mr.
Wesley himself, in his Annotations on Gen. i. 1, calls the
Elohim, a “covenant God.’” True, in covenant with man.
But I say not one word of any covenant between the Father
and the Son. But “in his note on Isaiah lv. 4, speaking of
the covenant made between God and David, he says, “This
David is Christ.’” Undoubtedly I do; but what is this
brought to prove? My words are, “I have appointed, and
will in due time give him—the David last-mentioned, even
Christ—a witness—to declare the will of God concerning the
duty and salvation of men, to bear witness to the truth, to
confirm God’s promises, and, among others, those which respect
FARRAGO DOUBLE-DISTILLED. 423
the calling of the Gentiles; to be a witness to both parties of
that covenant made between God and man.” (Page 209.)
Yea, of the “covenant made between God and man l” Of a
covenant between the Father and the Son here is not a word.
“The only possible conclusion to be drawn from this
defence of Mr. Wesley’s is, that he became a commentator
on the Bible before he could read the Bible.” That is pity!
If he could not read it when he was threescore years old, I
doubt he never will. See the candour, the good-nature, of
Mr. Hill ! Is this Attic salt, or wormwood ?
What conclusion can be possibly drawn in favour of Mr.
Hill? The most favourable I can draw is this, that he never
read the book which he quotes; that he took the word of
some of his friends. But how shall we excuse them? I hope
they trusted their memories, not their eyes. But what
recompence can he make to me for publishing so gross a
falsehood, which, nevertheless, those who read his tract, and
not mine, will take to be as true as the gospel?
II.
Of Election and Perseverance.
19. In entering upon this head, I observed, “Mr. Sellon
has clearly showed, that the Seventeenth Article does not
assert absolute predestination. Therefore, in denying this, I
neither contradict that article nor myself.” (Remarks, p. 382.)
It lies therefore upon Mr. Hill to answer Mr. Sellon before
he witticizes upon me. Let him do this, and he talks to the
purpose; otherwise, all the pretty, lively things, he says about
Dr. Baroe, Bishop Wilkins, Dr. Clark, and George Bell, are
utterly thrown away.
As to George Bell, Mr. Richard says, Mr. M d “justly
censures the enthusiasm and credulity of Mr. John, in paying
so much attention to Bell’s ridiculous reveries; in calling him
a sensible man, and entreating him to continue in his society,
on account of the great good he did. However, Bell refused
to remain in connexion with him, because of his double
dealings and unfaithful proceedings; for he sometimes was full
of Bell’s praises; at other times, he would warn the people
against him. He also gives a particular narration of what he
rightly calls the ‘comet enthusiasm.” Mr. John preached more
than ten times about the comet, which he supposed was to
appear in 1758, to burn up all the produce of the earth, and
424 REMARKs on MR. HILL’s
lastly to execute its grand commission on the globe itsclf,
causing the stars to fall from heaven.” (Farrago, p. 37.)
What an heap of dirt is here raked together ! I must not
let it pass quite unnoticed. (1.) He “justly censures the enthu
siasm and credulity of Mr. Wesley in paying so much atten
tion to Bell’s ridiculous reveries.” Nay, so very little, that I
checked them strongly, as soon as ever they came to my know
ledge; particularly his whim about the end of the world, which
I earnestly opposed, both in private and public. (2) “Bragging
of the many miraculous cures he had wrought.” I bragged
of—that is, simply related, the case of Mary Special, and no
other; in the close of which I said, “Here are three plain
facts,—She was ill; she is well; she became so in a moment.
Which of these can with any modesty be denied?” I still
ask the same question. (3.) That I ever called him “a
sensible man,” is altogether false. A man of faith and love I
then knew him to be; but I never thought him a man of
sense. (4.) That I “entreated him to continue in the society,”
is likewise totally false. (5.) Nor did I ever tell him, on that
or any other occasion, of “the great good” he did. I know
he was an instrument in God’s hands of convincing and
converting many sinners. But though I speak this now to
all the world, I never spoke it to himself. (6.) Neither did
he ever refuse, what never was asked, “to remain in connexion
with me.” (7.) Least of all did he refuse it because of my
“double-dealings or unfaithful proceedings.” He never
mentioned to me any such thing, nor had he any pretence so
to do. (8.) Nay, but you “was at some times full of Bell's
praises.” Very moderately full. “At other times,” that is,
after he ran mad, “you warned the people against him.” I
warned them not to regard his prophecies, particularly with
regard to the 28th of February. (Journal, Vol. III., p. 130.)
20. “He also gives us a particular narration of what he
rightly calls the comet-enthusiasm. Mr. John preached more
than ten times about the comet he supposed was to appear in
1758, and to consume the globe.” This is a foolish slander,
as it is so easily confuted. A tract was published at that
very time, entitled, “Serious Thoughts occasioned by the
Earthquake at Lisbon.” The thing which I then accidentally
mentioned in preaching (twice or thrice; it may be, four times)
is there set down at large, much more at large than ever I
mentioned it in any sermon. The words are these :--
FARRAGO DOUBLE-DISTILLED. 425
“Dr. Halley fixes the return of the comet, which appeared
in 1682, in the year 1758.” Observe, Dr. Halley does this,
not I. On which he adds: “But may the great, good God
avert such a shock or contact of such great bodies, moving
with such forces, (which, however, is by no means impossi
ble,) lest this most beautiful order of things be entirely
destroyed, and reduced into its ancient chaos.” (Serious
Thoughts, Vol. XI., pp. 8, 9.)
“But what, if God should not avert this contact? what
would the consequence be?” That consequence I afterwards
describe: “Burning up all the produce of the earth, and then
the globe itself.” But do I affirm, or suppose, that it actually
will do this? I suppose, nay, affirm, at the bottom of the same
page, the direct contrary: “What security is there against all
this, on the infidel hypothesis? But on the Christian there is
abundant security; for the prophecies are not yet fulfilled.”
21. So much for the comet-enthusiasm. We return now
to the point of unconditional election: “One would imagine,”
says Mr. Hill, “by Mr. W.’s quoting the Thirty-first Article,
in contradiction to the Seventeenth, that he thought the
Reformers as inconsistent as himself.” (Farrago, p. 54.) I
did not quote the Thirty-first in contradiction to the Seven
teenth, but in explication of it. The latter, the Thirty-first,
can bear but one meaning; therefore it fixes the sense of the
former. “Nay, this Article speaks nothing of the extent of
Christ’s death, but of its all-sufficiency.” (Pages 54, 55.)
Nothing of the extent / Why, it speaks of nothing else; its
all-sufficiency is out of the question. The words are: “The
offering of Christ once made, is that perfect redemption,
propitiation, and satisfaction, for all the sins of the whole
world, both original and actual.” It is here affirmed, the
death of Christ is a perfect satisfaction for all the sins of the
whole world. It would be sufficient for a thousand worlds.
But of this the Article says nothing.
But “even Bishop Burnet allows our Reformers to have
been zealous Calvinists.” He does not allow them all to
be such; he knew and you know the contrary. You cannot
but know, that Bishop Ridley, Hooper, and Latimer, to
name no more, were firm Universalists.
22. But the contradictions ! Where are the contradic
tions? “Why, sometimes you deny election; yet another
time you say, -
426 REMARKs on MR. HILL’s
“From all eternity with love
Unchangeable thou hast me view’d.’” +
I answered, “I believe this is true, on the supposition of
faith foreseen, not otherwise.”
Here is therefore no contradiction, unless on that
supposition, which I do uot allow.
But sometimes “you deny the perseverance of the saints.
Yet in one place you say, ‘I do not deny that those eminently
styled the elect shall persevere.’” R mean those that are
perfected in love. So I was inclined to think for many years:
But for ten or twelve years I have been fully convinced, that
even these may make “shipwreck of the faith.”
23. But “several of Mr. Hill’s quotations are from Mr.
Charles Wesley's Hymns, for which Mr. John says he will
not be answerable.”
I will now explain myself on this head. Though there are
some expressions in my brother's Hymns which I do not
use, as being very liable to be misconstrued; yet I am fully
satisfied, that, in the whole tenor of them, they thoroughly
agree with mine, and with the Bible. (2) That there is no
jot of Calvinism therein; that not one hymn, not one verse
of an hymn, maintains either unconditional election, or
infallible perseverance. Therefore, I can readily answer Mr.
H.’s question, “How can Mr. W. answer it to his own
conscience, to write prefaces and recommendations to Hymns
which he does not believe?” There is the mistake. I do
believe them; although still I will not be answerable for
every expression which may occur therein. But as to those
expressions which you quote in proof of final perseverance,
they prove thus much, and no more, that the persons who
use them have at that time “the full assurance of hope.”
Hitherto, then, Mr. Hill has brought no proof that I
contradict myself.
III.
Of Imputed Righteousness.
24. “Blessed be God, we are not among those who are so
dark in their conceptions and expressions. “We no more
deny,” says Mr. W., ‘the phrase of imputed righteousness,
than the thing.’” (Page 23.) It is true: For I continually
* Page 21.
FARRAGO DOUBLE-DISTILLED, 427
affirm, to them that believe, faith is imputed for righteous
ness. And I do not contradict this, in still denying that
phrase, “the imputed righteousness of Christ,” to be in the
Bible; or in beseeching both Mr. Hervey and you, “not to
dispute for that particular phrase.”
But “since Mr. W. blesses God for enlightening him to
receive the doctrine, and to adopt the phrase of ‘imputed
righteousness; how came he to think that clear conceptions
of the doctrine were so unnecessary, and the phrase itself so
useless, after having so deeply lamented the dark conceptions
of those who rejected the term and the thing?”
It was neither this term, “the imputed righteousness of
Christ,” nor the thing which Antinomians mean thereby,
the rejection of which I supposed to argue any darkness of
conception. But those I think dark in their conceptions,
who reject either the Scripture phrase, “faith imputed for
righteousness,” or the thing it means.
25. However, to prove his point, Mr. Hill goes on :
“This doctrine” (of the “The use of the term” (the
“imputed righteousness of “imputed righteousness of
Christ”) “I have constantly Christ”) “is not scriptural;
believed and taught for near it is not necessary; it has
eight-and-twenty years.” done immense hurt.”e
“‘It has done immense hurt, says Mr. W.; ‘but here is
no contradiction.’ Whether there be or not, there is a plain
concession from Mr. W. himself, that he has been preaching
a doctrine for eight-and-twenty years together, which has
done immense hurt.”
Let this (one instance out of an hundred) be a specimen
of Mr. Hill's fairness ! The whole strength of the argument
depends on the artful jumbling of two sentences together,
and inserting two or three little words into the latter of them.
My words are: “We no more deny the phrase” (of “imputed
righteousness”) “than the thing.” (Remarks, p. 383.)
“This doctrine I have believed and taught for near eight
and-twenty years.” (Ibid.)
These distinct sentences Mr. Hill is pleased to thrust
together into one, and to mend thus:
“This doctrine (of the imputed righteousness of Christ) I
have constantly believed and taught for near eight-and
twenty years.”
And here, says Mr. H., is a “plain concession from Mr.
428 REMARKs on MR. HILL’s
W. himself, that he has been preaching a doctrine for
twenty-eight years together, which has done immense hurt.”
No, the doctrine which I believe has done immense hurt,
is that of the imputed righteousness of Christ in the
Antinomian sense. The doctrine which I have constantly
held and preached is, that faith is imputed for righteousness.
And when I have either in that sermon or elsewhere said,
that “the righteousness of Christ is imputed to every
believer,” I mean, every believer is justified for the sake of
what Christ has done and suffered. Yet still I think, “there
is no use in contending for that particular phrase.” And I
say still, “I dare not insist upon it, because I cannot find it
in the Bible.”
To contradict this, Mr. H. cites these words: “‘This...is
fully consistent with our being justified, through the
imputation of Christ's righteousness.” Mr. W.’s notes on
Romans iv. 9.” Mr. H. adds: “These two, taken together,
produce the following conclusion, that it is perfectly consist
ent to say, that we are justified by that which cannot be
found in the Bible.” (Farrago, p. 24.)
That note runs thus: “‘Faith was imputed to Abraham
for righteousness.’ This is fully consistent with our being
justified through the imputation of the righteousness of Christ:
That is, our being pardoned, and accepted of God, for the
sake of what Christ has done and suffered. For though this,
and this alone, be the meritorious cause of our acceptance
with God, yet faith may be said to be ‘imputed to us for
righteousness,’ as it is the sole condition of our acceptance.”
Now, is there any shadow of contradiction in this? or of our
being justified by that which cannot be found in the Bible?
26. “Mr. W. frequently puts the expression, “imputed
righteousness,’ in the mouth of a whole congregation. Yet
he says, “I dare not require any to use it.’” Hence Mr.
Hill deduces these two conclusions:—
(1) “That Mr. W. gives out such doctrines as he dares
not require any others to believe.” (Page 25.)
By what logic is this deduced? We are not speaking of
doctrines at all, but simply of a particular expression. And
that expression is not “imputed righteousness,” but “the
imputed righteousness of Christ.”
(2.) “That a whole congregation may have words in their
mouths, and yet be all silent.”
FARRAGO DOUBLE-DISTILLED. 429
Well inferred again! But did I say, “A whole congrega
tion had those words in their mouths?” I did not either say
or suppose it; any more than that they were all silent.
“Will Mr. W. be ingenuous enough to tell me, whether
he did not write this when he was last in a certain country,
which abounds with crassa ingenia?”* I will. I did not
write this in the fogs of Ireland, but in the clear air of
Yorkshire.
27. The two next propositions Mr. Hill quotes, are,
“They to whom the righteousness of Christ is imputed,” (I
mean, who truly believe,) “are made righteous by the Spirit
of Christ; are renewed in the image of God, in righteousness
and true holiness.”
“The nice, metaphysical doctrine of imputed righteous
ness” (if it is not carefully guarded) “leads not to repent
ance, but to licentiousness. I have known a thousand
instances of this.”
And where is the contradiction between these propositions?
“It is just this,” says Mr. Hill, “that the doctrine of imputed
righteousness makes those who believe it both holy and
unholy.” (Page 26.)
Unfold the propositions a little more, and then let any man
judge.
The First means just this: They whom God justifies, for
the sake of what Christ has done and suffered, (whether they
ever heard of that phrase, “imputing the righteousness of
Christ,” or not,) are sanctified by his Spirit; are renewed in
the image of God, in righteousness and true holiness.
The Second means: I have known very many who so rested
in the doctrine of the righteousness of Christ imputed to
them, that they were quite satisfied without any holiness at all.
Now, where is the contradiction?
But my inserting in my own sentence those explanatory
words, “I mean, who truly believe,” Mr. H. calls an interpola
tion; and supposes I “mean to make a distinction between
faith in Christ, and faith in the righteousness of Christ.” I
mean just what I have said again and again, particularly in
the note above cited. And this is the very thing which John
Goodwin means, as he declares over and over.
Mr. W. “winds up this point of imputed righteousness
with a resolution which astonishes me, that “he will never
* Persons of dull understandings.-EDIT.
430 REMARKs on MR. HILL’s
more use the phrase, the imputed righteousness of Christ,
unless it occur to him in a hymn, or steal upon him unawares.’”
This is my resolution. I repeat once more what I said in the
“Remarks:” “The thing, that we are justified merely for
the sake of what Christ has done and suffered, I have con
stantly and earnestly maintained above four-and-thirty years.
And I have frequently used the phrase, hoping thereby to
please others ‘for their good to edification. But it has had a
contrary effect, since so many improve it into an objection.
Therefore I will use it no more.” (I mean, the phrase
imputed righteousness; that phrase, the imputed righteousness
of Christ, I never did use.) “I will endeavour to use only
such phrases as are strictly scriptural. And I will advise all
my brethren, all who are in connexion with me throughout
the three kingdoms, to lay aside that ambiguous, unscriptural
phrase, (the imputed righteousness of Christ,) which is so
liable to be misinterpreted, and speak in all instances, this in
particular, as the oracles of God.”
IV.
Of a two-fold Justification.
My words cited as contradicting this, run thus:
28. “In the afternoon I was informed how many wise and
learned men, who cannot in terms deny it, (because our
Articles and Homilies are not yet repealed,) explain justifica
tion by faith: They say, Justification is two-fold, the First
in this life, the Second at the last day, &c. In opposition
to this, I maintain, that the justification spoken of by St.
Paul to the Romans, and in our Articles, is not two-fold; it
is one, and no more.” (Remarks, page 388.) True. And
where do I contradict this? Where do I say, the justifica
tion spoken of by St. Paul to the Romans, and in our
Articles, is any more than one? The question between
them and me concerned this justification, and this only,
which I affirmed to be but one. They averred, “But there
is a second justification at the last day; therefore justification
is not one only.” Without entering into that question, I
replied, “The justification whereof St. Paul and our Articles
speak, is one only.” And so I say still; and yet I do not
deny that there is another justification (of which our Lord
speaks) at the last day.
PARRAGO DOUBLE-DISTILLED. 431
I do not therefore condemn the distinction of a two-fold
justification, in saying, That spoken of in our Articles is but
one. And this is the thing which I affirmed, in “flat opposi
tion to those men.”
29. But “how is it possible to encounter such a man as
this, without watching him through every line? And there
fore I wish my readers would closely compare the “Remarks’
with the “Review’ itself;” (I desire no more. Whoever
does this, will easily discern on which side the truth lies;)
“as it is impracticable to point out half the little arts of this
kind which Mr. W. has stooped to.” That is, in civil terms,
“Sir, you are a knave.” Sir, I crave your mercy. I stoop to
mo art, but that of plain, sound reasoning. By this art, and
by this alone, I am able to untwist truth from falsehood, how
skilfully soever they are woven together. I dare use no
other; for (whether you know it or no) I fear God. And by
his grace, in simplicity and godly sincerity I have my
conversation in the world.
“But how agrees this with what Mr. W. tells us, that he
has never contradicted himself with regard to justification,
since the year 1738?” (Farrago, p. 39.) Perfectly well.
“How long has he held that justification is fourfold?” I
have said nothing about it yet. “And how will he reconcile
this with its being twofold, and with his preceding affirmation,
that it is one and no more?” When time is, this mystery
too may be cleared up.
V.
Of a Justified State.
30. Mr. W. says, “The state of a justified person is inex
pressibly great and glorious.” (Page 34.)
“Yet he asks elsewhere, “Does not talking of a justified or
sanctified state, tend to mislead men ?” He answers: ‘It
frequently does mislead men;’” namely, when it is spoken of
in an unguarded manner. “‘But where is the contradiction?’
Whatever may be the contradiction, this is clearly the con
clusion,-that Mr. W., by his own confession, is a misleader
of men.”
It is not quite clear yet. You have first to prove that I use
the phrase “in an unguarded manner.” I confess, when it is
so used, it tends to mislead men; but I do not confess that I
use it so.
432 REMARKs on MR. HILL’s
VI.
Are Works a Condition of Justification?
31. “Mr. W. says, “No good works can be previous to
justification.’ And yet in the same page he asserts, ‘Who
ever desires to find favour with God should cease from evil,
and learn to do well.’”
I answered: “Does not the Bible say so? Who can deny
it? “Nay, but Mr. W. asks, If this be not in order to find
favour, what does he do them for?’ And I ask it again. Let
Mr. Hill, or any one else, give me an answer. So if there is
any contradiction here, it is not I contradict myself, but
Isaiah and our Lord that contradict St. Paul.” (Remarks,
pages 389, 390.)
Mr. Hill replies: “Then a man may do works in order to
find favour, and yet such works cannot be called good.” You
may call them so, if you please; but be not angry with me,
if I do not. I still believe, no good works can be done before
justification. Yet I believe, (and that without the least self
contradiction,) that final salvation is “by works as a condi
tion.” And let any one read over the twenty-fifth chapter of
St. Matthew, and deny it if he can.
VII.
Is Justification by Faith articulus stantis vel cadentis
Ecclesiae?
32. In the beginning of the year 1738, I believed it
was so. Soon after I found reason to doubt. Since that
time I have not varied. “Nay, but in the year 1763
you say, ‘This is the name whereby he shall be called, The
Lord our Righteousness. A truth this, of which may be
affirmed, (what Luther affirms of a truth nearly connected
with it, justification by faith,) it is articulus stantis vel
cadentis Ecclesiae.* It is certainly the pillar and ground
of that faith of which alone cometh salvation.’” (Farrago,
page 15.)
I answered: “It is certain, here is a seeming contradiction;
but it is not a real one; for these two opposite propositions do
not speak of the same thing. The latter speaks of justification
by faith; the former, of trusting in the righteousness or merits
* A doctrine without which there can be no Christian Church.
FARRAGO DOUBLE-DISTILLED. 433
of Christ. (Justification by faith is only mentioned inci.
dentally in a parenthesis.) Now, although Mr. Law denied
justification by faith, he might trust in the merits of Christ.
It is this, and this only, that I affirm (whatever Luther does)
to be articulus stantis vel cadentis Ecclesiae.” (Remarks,
page 391.)
But Mr. Hill thinks, “justification by faith, and by
trusting in the merits of Christ, are all one.” (Farrago, page
16.) Be they or not, I still think, “ some may doubt of
justification by faith, and yet not perish everlastingly.”
Does Mr. Hill judge that such an one cannot be saved? that
all Mystics (as well as Mr. Law) go to hell?
VIII.
Both Adam’s Sun and Christ’s Righteousness are imputed.
They are; the question is only, In what sense?
IX.
Of Merit.*
33. In the Minutes I say, “We are rewarded according to
our works, yea, because of our works. (Genesis xxii. 16, 17.)
How differs this from for the sake of our works? And how
differs this from secundum merita operum, or ‘as our works
deserve?” Can you split this hair? I doubt I cannot.” I
say so still. Let Mr. Hill, if he can.
“And yet I still maintain,” (so I added in the
“Remarks;” so I firmly believe,) “there is no merit, taking
the word strictly, but in the blood of Christ; that salvation
is not by the merit of works; and that there is nothing we
are, or have, or do, which can, strictly speaking, deserve the
least thing at God’s hand.
“And all this is no more than to say, Take the word merit
in a strict sense, and I utterly renounce it; take it in a looser
sense, and though I never use it, (I mean, I never ascribe it
to any man,) yet I do not condemn it. Therefore, with
regard to the word merit, I do not contradict myself at all.”
“You never use the word l’” says Mr. H.: “What have
we then been disputing about?” (Farrago, p. 36.) Why,
about a straw; namely, whether there be a sense in which
others may use that word without blame.
- * Page 35.
VOL. X. F F
434 REMARKs on MR. HILL’s
But can Mr. Hill, or any one living, suppose me to mean,
I do not use the word in the present question?
What Mr. H. adds, is a mere play upon words: “Does
Mr. W., by this looser merit, mean a merit that does not
merit?” Yes; by terming a work meritorious in this
improper sense, I do not mean, that it merits or deserves a
reward in the proper sense of the word. Instances of the
word taken in this improper sense occur all over the Bible.
“This is shamefully evasive.” No more than it is Greek.
It is a plain, rational, solid distinction; and it holds with
regard to numberless words in all languages, which may be
taken cither in a proper or improper sense.
When I say, “I do not grant that works are meritorious,
even when accompanied by faith,” I take that word in a
proper sense. But others take it in an improper, as nearly
equivalent with rewardable. Here, therefore, I no more
contradict Mr. Fletcher than I do myself. Least of all do I
plead, as Mr. H. roundly affirms, “for justification by the
merit of my own good works.” (Page 52.)
X.
Of Marriage.
34. “Mr. W. says, his thoughts on a single life are just the
same they have been these thirty years.” (I mean, with regard
to the advantages which attend that state in general.) “Why
then did he marry?” (Page 39.) I answered short, “For
reasons best known to himself.” As much as to say, I judge
it extremely impertinent for any but a superior to ask me the
question. So the harmless raillery which Mr. H. pleases
himself with upon this occasion may stand just as it is.
XI.
Concerning Dress.
35. “Mr. W. advises his followers to ‘wear nothing of a
glaring colour, nothing made in the height of the fashion,’ in
order to “increase their reward, and brighten their crown in
heaven.’
“Nevertheless, in his ‘Letter to a Quaker, he says, “To
make it a point of conscience to differ from others, as to the
shape and colour of their apparel, is mere superstition.’
FARRAGO DOUBLE-DISTILLED. 435
“Yet he says, “So I advise; but I do not make it a point
of conscience.’ It follows, that we are to increase our
reward, and brighten our crown in heaven, by doing that
which is mere superstition, and without acting from a point
of conscience.” (Page 40.)
I shall say more on this head than I otherwise would, in
order to show every impartial reader, by one instance in a
thousand, the manner wherein Mr. H. continually distorts
and murders my words.
In my “Advice to the People called Methodists,” I say,
“I would not advise you to imitate the people called
Quakers, in those particularities of dress which can answer
no end but to distinguish you from all other people; but I
advise you to imitate them in plainness. (1.) Let your
apparel be cheap, not expensive. (2.) Let it be grave, not
gay or showy; not in the point of the fashion.
“Would you have a farther rule? Then take one you
may always carry in your bosom : Do everything with a
single eye; and this will direct you in every circumstance.
Let a single intention to please God prescribe both what
clothing you shall buy, and the manner wherein it shall be
made, and how you shall put on and wear it. In other
words, let all you do in this respect, be so done, that you
may offer it to God, a sacrifice acceptable through Jesus
Christ; so that, consequently, it may increase your reward,
and brighten your crown in heaven.”
Now, is there anything ridiculous in all this? I
would appeal even to a rational Deist, whether it be not,
upon the Christian scheme, all agreeable to the highest
reason ?
36. “But it is inconsistent with what you said elsewhere:
“To make it a point of conscience to differ from others, as
the Quakers do, in the shape or colour of their apparel, is
mere superstition.’”
Not inconsistent at all. It is mere superstition to make
wearing a broad-brimmed hat, or a coat with four buttons,
(the very thing I referred to in the preceding page,) a point
of conscience; that is, a thing necessary to salvation.
“Why then,” says Mr. H., “we are to increase our
reward, and brighten our crown in heaven, by doing what is
‘mere superstition, and without acting from a ‘point of
conscience l’”
2 F 2
436 REMARKs on MR. HILL’s
Was ever such twisting of words? Has he not great
reason to cry out, “O rare Logica Wesleiensis / Qui bene
distinguit bene docet !”* I bless God, I can distinguish
reason from sophistry; unkind, unjust, ungenteel sophistry,
used purely for this good end,—to asperse, to blacken a
fellow-Christian, because he is not a Calvinist !
No, Sir; what I call “superstition, and no point of
conscience,” is wearing a Quaker hat or coat; which is
widely different from the plainness of dress that I recom
mend to the people called Methodists.
My logic, therefore, stands unimpeached; I wish your
candour did so too.
I would engage to answer every objection of Mr. H.’s, as
fairly and fully as this. But I cannot spare so much time;
I am called to other employment.
And I should really think Mr. H. might spend his time
better than in throwing dirt at his quiet neighbours.
XII.
Of Tea.
37. “Mr. W. published a tract against drinking tea, and
told the tea-drinkers he would set them an example in that
piece of self-denial.” (Farrago, p. 41.)
“I did set them an example for twelve years. Then, at
the close of a consumption, by Dr. Fothergill’s direction, I
used it again.” (Remarks, p. 393.)
“Why then did Mr. W. re-publish this tract, making the
world believe it brought a paralytic disorder upon him?”
Before I was twenty years old, it made my hand shake, so
that I could hardly write. “Is it not strange then, that Dr.
Fothergill should advise Mr. W. to use what had before
thrown him into the palsy ?” I did not say so. I never
had the palsy yet; though my hand shook, which is a
“paralytic disorder.” But be it strange or not, so Dr. F.
advised; if you believe not me, you may inquire of himself.
The low wit that follows, I do not meddle with ; I leave it
with the gentle reader.
* O rare Wesleyan Logic teacher.—EDIT.
He who is clear in making distinctions is an able
fARRAGO DOUBLE-DISTILLED. 437
XIII.
Of Baptism.
38. “Mr. W. says, “As there is no clear proof for dip
ping in Scripture, so there is very probable proof to the
contrary.’
“Why then did you at Savannah baptize all children by
immersion, unless the parents certified they were weak?”
(Farrago, p. 42.)
I answered: “Not because I had any scruple, but in
obedience to the Rubric.”
Mr. H., according to custom, repeats the objection, without
taking the least notice of the answer.
As to the story of half drowning Mrs. L. S., let her aver
it to my face, and I shall say more. Only observe, Mr.
Toplady is not “my friend.” He is all your own; your
friend, ally, and fellow soldier:—
Ut non
Compositus melius cum Bitho Bacchius ! *
You are in truth, duo fulmina belli.t. It is not strange
if their thunder should quite drown the sound of my “poor
pop-guns.”
39. “But what surpasses everything else is, that Mr. W.
cannot even speak of his contradictions, without contradicting
himself afresh. For he absolutely denies, not only that he
ever was unsettled in his principles, but that he was ever
accused of being so, either by friends or foes.” (Pages 39, 40.)
Either by friends or foes / I will rest the whole cause upon
this. If this be true, I am out of my wits. If it be false,
what is Mr. Hill? An honest, upright, sensible man; but
a little too warm, and therefore not seeing so clearly in this
as in other things.
My words are: “My friends have oftener accused me of
being too stiff in my opinions, than too flexible. My enemies
have accused me of both, and of everything besides.” (Remarks,
p. 402.) Is this “denying that ever I was accused of incon
sistency either by friends or foes.”
* This quotation from Horace is thus translated by Boscawen :
“Not half so justly match'd engage
Bithus and Bacchius on the stage.”-EDIT.
+ Two thunderbolts of war.-EDIT.
4.38 REMARKs on MR. HILL’s
I do still deny, that Mr. Delamotte spoke to me “of my
wavering, unsettled disposition.” (Farrago, p. 43.) But “he
spoke to you,” says Mr. Hill, “of something else.” It is
very likely he might.
40. Mr. W. is equally self-inconsistent “with regard to
the Mystics. These, he tells us, he had once in great vene
ration,” (I had, two or three and forty years ago) “as the
best explainers of the gospel of Christ. Yet afterwards he
declares, he looks upon them as one great Antichrist.” (Page
14.) I did look upon them as such thirty years ago. But
in my “Remarks” I say, “I retract this. It is far too strong.
But observe, I never contradicted it till now.”
But how does this agree with Mr. W.'s saying, “I never
was in the way of Mysticism at all?”
Perfectly well: I admired the Mystic writers. But I never
was in their way; leaving off the outward means.
“But why did Mr. W. let the expression stand, ‘Solomon
is the chief of the Mystics?’” Perhaps because I thought it
an harmless one, and capable of a good meaning. But I
Dbserve again: Mr. H. takes it for granted, that I have the
Xorrection of Mr. Fletcher’s books. This is a mistake: Of
some I have; of others I have not.
41. Now comes the capital instance of self-inconsistency:
“In 1770, Mr. W. esteems the Minutes the standard of
orthodoxy. In 1771, he signs a paper, owning them to be
unguarded. In 1772, he tells us, he does not know but it
would have been better, not to have signed that paper at all !”
(Page 13.) Suppose all this true, what will it prove? Only
that I made a concession which was made an ill use of.
But “Mr. F.’s defence makes poor Mr. W. appear more
and more inconsistent. Mr. W. declares the Minutes to be
unguarded:” (That is, “not enough guarded” against cavil
lers:) “Mr. F. defends them, and strives to reconcile them
with the Declaration. But then comes Mr. W., and tells us,
he does not know, but it had been better not to have signed it
at all.” And what then? Why, “hereby he intimates, that he
has fixed a different sense upon the Minutes from that which
they originally bore.” No such thing; he intimates this and
no more, that by that well-intended concession, he had given
occasion, to those who sought occasion, of offence against him.
So all this laboured charge vanishes into air; and no more
proves inconsistency than high-treason.
FATRRAGO DOUBLE-DISTILLED. 439
42. We come now to the main point, perfection; the
objections to which spread almost throughout the book.
But the question is not, whether the doctrine be true or
false; but whether I contradict myself concerning it.
As to what occurs in the fourth and fifth pages, it may
therefore suffice to say, I do believe (as you observe) that
real Christians (meaning those that are “perfected in love”)
are freed from evil or sinful thoughts. And where do I
contradict this?
“You say, I cannot prove the facts alleged against some
professors of perfection. Indeed I can.” (Page 10.) If
you could, that would not prove that I contradict myself on
this head.
“But one at Worcester writes, ‘I can send you an account
of two or three shocking instances of bad behaviour among
the professors of perfection here.’” Perhaps so. But will
that prove my inconsistency?
43. Awhile since, Mr. Ma—d related to me the whole story
of Samuel Wi-n. I know not that I ever heard of it before,
but only some imperfect fragments of it. The other story, of
“a Preacher of perfection who said, the Holy Ghost visibly
descended on all true converts,” may be true for aught I
know; but I question much, whether that madman was a
Preacher. It may likewise be true, that several wild expres
sions were uttered at West-street chapel. Yet I think, all
these put together will not prove, that I contradict myself.
However, I am glad to read, “If I publish another edition
of the Review, these instances shall all be omitted; and
personal vilifications shall be left to the sole pen of Mr. W.”
Then you will reduce your Farrago to a page, and your
Review to a penny pamphlet. But still “personal vilification”
will not suit my pen. I have better employment for it.
44. You say, “Let us now proceed to Mr. W.’s assertions
on sinless perfection.” (Page 26.)
As I observed before, I am not now to dispute whether
they are right or wrong. I keep therefore to that single
point, Do I herein contradict myself, or not?
When I said, “If some of our hymns contradict others,” I
did not allow they do. I meant only, if it were so, this would
not prove that I contradict myself. “But still it proves, the
people must sing contradictions.” Observe, that is, if—.
In your account of perfection, blot out “no wandering
440 REMARKs on MR. HILL’s
thoughts.” None in the body are exempt from these. This
we have declared over and over; particularly in the sermon
wrote upon that subject.
If in the sermon on Ephesians ii. 8, (not xi. 5, as your
blunderer prints it,) the words which I had struck out in the
preceding edition, are inserted again, what will this prove?
Only that the printer, in my absence, printed, not from the
last, but from an uncorrected, copy. However, you are
hereby excused from unfairness, as to that quotation. But
what excuse have you in the other instance, with regard to
Enoch and Elijah? On which I asked, “Why is Mr. Hill so
careful to name the first edition? Because in the second the
mistake is corrected. Did he know this? And could he
avail himself of a mistake which he knew was removed before
he wrote?” (Remarks, p. 395.)
It is now plain he could ! Nay, instead of owning his
unfairness, he endeavours to turn the blame upon me ! “You
are as inconsistent in your censures as in your doctrines:
You blame me for quoting the last edition of your Sermon ;
whereas you call me to account for quoting the first edition of
your Notes, concerning Enoch and Elijah; each of whom you
have proved, by a peculiar rule of Foundery-logic, to be both
in heaven and out of heaven.” So, without any remorse,
nay, being so totally unconcerned as even to break jests on
the occasion, you again “avail yourself of a mistake which
you knew was removed before you wrote.”
45. But Mr. Wesley “hath both struck out some words, and
put in others, into the sermon.” This is a common complaint
with Mr. Hill, on which therefore it is needful to explain.
I generally abridge what I answer; which cannot be done
without striking out all unessential words. And I generally
put into quotations from my own writings, such words as I
judge will prevent mistakes.
Now to the contradictions:
“‘If we say we have no sin’ now remaining,” (I mean,
after we are justified,) “‘we deceive ourselves.’”
I believe this; and yet I believe,
“Sin shall not always in our flesh remain.”
Again:
“Many infirmities do remain.”
This I believe; and I believe also,
“‘He that is born of God,” (and “keepeth himself,'
FARRAGO DOUBLE-DISTILLED. 441
1 John v. 18,) * sinneth not by infirmities, whether in act,
word, or thought.”
I believe likewise, that in those perfected in love,
“No wrinkle of infirmity,
No spot of sin remains.”
My brother, at the bottom of the page, expressly says, “No
sinful infirmity.” So whether this be scriptural or not, here
is no contradiction.
I have spoken so largely already concerning sins of surprise
and infirmity, that it is quite needless to add any more. I
need only refer to the “Remarks,” at the 399th and following
pages.
46. But to go on:
“I wrestle not now.”
This is an expression of my brother's, which I do not
subscribe to.
“We wrestle not with flesh and blood.”
“This he allows to be his own.” (Page 31.)
Indeed I do not; although, it is true, “the perpetual war
which I speak of in the note on Eph. vi. 13, is a war with
principalities and powers, but not with flesh and blood.”
“But either way, Mr. John is stuck fast in the mire. For in
his “Remarks,’ he contradicts his brother; in his Annotations,
he contradicts himself; and in his Hymn, he contradicts both
bis brother and himself.”
Mr. John is not quite stuck fast yet; for this is a mistake
from beginning to end. (1) I do not contradict my brother
in my “Remarks.” In saying, “I do not subscribe to that
expression,” I mean, I do not make it my own; I do not
undertake to defend it. Yet neither do I enter the lists
against it; it is capable of a sound meaning. (2.) I do not
contradict myself in the note; let him prove it that can.
(3.) I contradict nobody in the hymn; for it is not mine.
Again: “I never said,
While one evil thought can rise,
I am not born again.”
My brother said so once; but he took the words in too high
a sense.” I add, and in a sense not warranted by the Bible.
And yet I believe, that “real Christians, I mean those
perfected in love, are freed from evil or sinful thoughts.”
“But is not a babe in Christ born again? Is he not a real
442 REMARKs on MR. HILL’s
Christian?” He is doubtless born again; and in some sense
he is a real Christian; but not in the sense above defined.
47. We come now to the additional contradictions whiêh
Mr. Hill undertakes to find in my writings. They are already
dwindled into one; and I hope to show quickly, this one is
none at all. It stands thus:—
“Most express are the words of St. John : “We know,
that whosoever is born of God sinneth not.’”
“Indeed, it is said, This means only, he doth not commit
sin wilfully or habitually.”
(Observe. I do not deny the text to mean this; but I
deny that it means this only.)
As a contradiction to this, Mr. Hill places these words in
the opposite column:—
“The Apostle John declares, ‘Whosoever is born of God
sinneth not,’ (1.) By any habitual sin; nor, (2.) By any wilful
sin.” True; but do I say, the Apostle means this only?
Otherwise, here is no contradiction. So, although you have
got the gallows ready, you have not turned off old Mordecai
yet. As you so frequently give me that appellation, I for
once accept of your favour.
48. “Before I quit this subject,” (of perfection,) “I cannot
help expressing my astonishment, that Mr. Wesley should
deny that his tenets on that point exactly harmonize with
those of the Popish Church; since all the decrees and books
that have been published by the Roman Clergy prove this
matter beyond a doubt.”
I believe you have been told so. But you should not
assert it, unless from personal knowledge. “Alexander Ross
says so.” What is Alexander Ross? See with your own
eyes. “Mr. Hervey too gives an account of Lindenus and
Andradius.” Second-hand evidence still. Have you seen
them yourself? Otherwise, you ought not to allow their
testimony. As to that “most excellent and evangelical
work,” as you term it, the Eleven Letters ascribed to Mr.
Hervey, Mr. Sellon has abundantly shown, that they are
most excellently virulent, scurrilous, and abusive; and full as
far from the evangelical spirit, as the Koran of Mahomet.
“But Bishop Cowper”—I object to him, beside his being
a hot, bitter Calvinist, that he is a dull, heavy, shallow writer.
And let him be what he may, all you cite from him is but
second-hand authority. “Nay, I refer to the Bishop's own
FARRAGo Dou BLE-DISTILLED. 443
words.” But still, you have only the words at second-hand.
In order to know the tenets of the Church of Rome, you must
read the Romish authors themselves. Nay, it does not suffice
to read their own private authors. They will disown anything
we charge them with, unless we can prove it by recurring to
their public and authentic records. Such are the “Canones et
Decreta Concilii Tridentini.” Such the “Catechismus ad
Parochos.” Till you have read these at least, you should
never undertake to determine what is, or what is not, Popery.
49. “But as I am now on the subject of Popery, I must
make a few animadversions on what Mr. Wesley affirms, ‘I
always thought the tenets of the Church of Rome were nearer
by half to Mr. Hill's tenets, than to Mr. Wesley’s.” (Page 33.)
Nay, give the honour of this to its true author: Mr. Hill
goes to consult a Popish Friar at Paris, a Benedictine Monk,
one Father Walsh, concerning the Minutes of the Conference.
Father Walsh (Mr. Hill says; and I see no reason to scruple
his authority here) assures him that the Minutes contain false
doctrine; and that the tenets of the Church of Rome are
nearer by half to his (Mr. Hill's) tenets than they are to Mr.
Wesley's. (So Mr. Hill himself informs the world, in the
Paris Conversation, of famous memory, which I really think
he would never have published, unless, as the vulgar say, the
devil had owed him a shame.) I add, “Truly, I always
thought so.” But I am the more confirmed therein, by the
authority of so competent a judge; especially when his judg
ment is publicly delivered by so unexceptionable a witness.
50. Nay, but “you know, the principles of the Pope and
of John Calvin are quite opposite to each other.” I do not
know that they are opposite at all in this point. Many Popes
have been either Dominicans or Benedictines: And many of
the Benedictines, with all the Dominicans, are as firm
Predestinarians as Calvin himself. Whether the present
Pope is a Dominican, I cannot tell: If he is, he is far nearer
your tenets than mine.
Let us make the trial with regard to your ten propositions:—
(1) “You deny election.” “So does the Pope of
Rome.” I know not that.
Probably he holds it.
(2.) “You deny persever- “So does the Pope of
ance.” Rome.” That is much to be
doubted.
444 REMARKs on MR. HILL’s
(3) “You deny imputed
righteousness.”
Perhaps the Pope of Rome
does; but I assert it continu
ally.
(4) “You hold free-will.”
“So does the Pope of
Rome.” No; not as I do ;
(unless he is a Predestina
rian: Otherwise,) he ascribes
it to nature, I to grace.
(5) “You hold that works
If you mean good works, I
are a condition of justifica
do not.
tion.”
(6) “You hold a twofold
justification; one now, another
at the last day.”
“So does the Pope of
Rome.” And so do all Pro
testants, if they believe the
Bible.
(7) “You hold the doctrine
I do not. Neither does the
of merit.”
Pope, if Father Walsh says
true.
(8) “You hold sinless per
“So does the Pope.” I
fection.”
deny that. How do you
prove it?
(9.) “You hold, that sins
I hold no such thing; and
are only infirmities.”
you know it well.
(10) “You distinguish
Not so; I abhor the dis
between venial and mortal
tinction.
sins.”
Now, let every man of understanding judge, whether
Father Walsh did not speak the very truth.
51. “This pamphlet was finished, when I was told, that
Mr. W. had lately a very remarkable dream, which awakened
him out of a sound sleep. This dream he communicated to
his society. It was in substance as follows:—A big, rough
inan came to him, and gave him a violent blow upon the arm
with a red-hot iron.
“Now, the interpretation thereof I conceive to be as
follows:—
“(1.) The big, rough man is Mr. Hill: (2.) The bar of
iron” (red-hot 1) “is Logica Wesleiensis: (3.) The blow
denotes the shock which Mr. John will receive by the said
pamphlet: (4.) His being awakened out of a sound sleep,
signifies there is yet hope, that he will, some time or other,
come to the right use of his spiritual faculties.” (Page 61.)
FARRAGO DOUBLE-DISTILLED. 445
Pretty, and well devised ! And though it is true I never
had any such dream since I was born, yet I am obliged to
the inventor of it; and that on many accounts.
I am obliged to him, (1.) For sending against me only a
big, rough man; it might have been a lion or a bear:
(2.) For directing the bar of iron only to my arm; it might
have been my poor skull: (3.) For letting the big man give
me only one blow; had he repeated it, I had been slain
outright: And, (4.) For hoping I shall, some time or other,
come to the right use of my spiritual faculties.
52. Perhaps Mr. Hill may expect that I should make him
some return for the favour of his heroic poem: But
Certes I have, for many days,
Sent my poetic herd to graze.
And had I not, I should have been utterly unable to present
him with a parallel. Yet, upon reflection, I believe I can;
although I own it is rather of the lyric than the heroic kind.
And because possibly he may be inclined to write notes on
this too, I will tell him the origin of it. One Sunday,
immediately after sermon, my father's clerk said, with an
audible voice, “Let us sing to the praise and glory of God,
an hymn of mine own composing.” It was short and sweet,
and ran thus:
King William is come home, come home !
King William home is come !
Therefore let us together sing
The hymn that's call'd Te D'um !
53. Before I conclude, I beg leave, in my turn, to give
you a few advices:
And, (1.) Be calm. Do not venture into the field again
till you are master of your temper. You know, “the wrath
of man worketh not the righteousness,” neither promotes the
truth, “ of God.”
(2.) Be good-natured. Passion is not commendable; but
ill-nature still less. Even irrational anger is more excusable
than bitterness, less offensive to God and man.
(3.) Be courteous. Show good manners, as well as good
nature, to your opponent, of whatever kind. “But he is
rude.” You need not be so too. If you regard not him,
reverence yourself.
Absolutely contrary to this is the crying out at every turn,
“Quirk I Sophistry ! Evasion l’” In controversy these
446 ANswer. To MR. RowLAND HILL’s
exclamations go for nothing. This is neither better nor
worse than calling names.
(4.) Be merciful. When you have gained an advantage
over your opponent, do not press it to the uttermost.
Remember the honest Quaker’s advice to his friend a few
years ago: “Art thou not content to lay John Wesley upon
his back, but thou wilt tread his guts out?”
(5.) In writing, do not consider yourself as a man of
fortune, or take any liberty with others on that account.
These distinctions weigh little more in the literary world,
than in the world of spirits. Men of sense simply consider
what is written; not whether the writer be a lord or a
cobbler.
Lastly. Remember, “for every idle word men shall speak,
they shall give an account in the day of judgment l”
Remember, “by thy words shalt thou be justified; or by thy
words shalt thou be condemned !”
BR1sToL,
March 14, 1773.
AN ANSWER
To
MR. ROWLAND HILL’S TRACT, ENTITLED,
“IMPOSTURE DETECTED.”
Jealousy, cruel as the grave l–Canticles viii. 6.
Michael the archangel, when contending with the devil, durst not bring a railing
accusation against him.—Jude 9.
IN a tract just published by Mr. Rowland Hill, there are
several assertions which are not true; and the whole
pamphlet is wrote in an unchristian and ungentlemanlike
manner. I shall first set down the assertions in order, and
then proceed to the manner.
IMPOSTURE DETECTED. 447
I. 1. “Throughout the whole of Paul's Epistles, he can
scarcely write a single line without mentioning Christ.” (Page
3.) I just opened on the fifteenth chapter of the First Epistle
to the Corinthians. In the last thirty verses of this chapter,
how often does he mention Christ? In every single line?
2. “In that wretched harangue, which he calls a sermon,
he makes himself the only subject of his own panegyrics.”
(Page 4.)
Being aware of this charge, I have said, “I am, in one
respect, an improper person to give this information; as it
will oblige me frequently to speak of myself, which may have
the appearance of ostentation. But, with regard to this, I
can only cast myself upon the candour of my hearers; being
persuaded they will put the most favourable construction upon
what is not a matter of choice, but of necessity. For there
is no other person, if I decline the task, who can supply my
place, who has a perfect knowledge of the work in question,
from the beginning of it to this day.” (Sermons, Vol. VII.,
p. 420.)
I give an account of the rise of this work at Oxford, from
1725 to 1735, pages 421, 422; at London and elsewhere,
pages 422,423. In all this there is not a line of panegyric
upon myself, but a naked recital of facts. Nor is there any
panegyric on any one in the following pages, but a plain
account of the Methodist doctrines.
It may be observed, (if it is worth observing,) that I
preached in the open air in October, 1735. Mr. Whitefield
was not then ordained.
3. “Not a single line tending to vindicate, or illustrate,
any one fundamental doctrine of the gospel appears
throughout the whole.” (Imposture Detected, p. 4.) Yes:
“Thou shalt love the Lord thy God,” is one fundamental
doctrine of the gospel: “Thou shalt love thy neighbour as
thyself,” is another. And both these are vindicated and
illustrated for several pages together.
4. “His sacrilegious hand violates the ashes of the dead,
traduces the character of Mr. Whitefield, insinuates that he
was the first who preached in the open air; with the greatest
bitterness of speech, traduces the dead, as a Dissenter from
the Church.” (Page 16.)
My words are: “A good man, who met with us at Oxford,
while he was absent from us, conversed much with Dissenters,
448 ANswer. To MR. Row LAND HILL's
and contracted a strong prejudice against the Church; and
not long after he totally separated from us;” (Ibid., page
429;) from my brother and me. This is every word I say
about Mr. Whitefield. And is this “violating the ashes of
the dead?” Is this “traducing his character?” Certainly
not traducing him as “a Dissenter from the Church,” much
less “with the greatest bitterness of speech.” Where is the
bitterness? And this is the whole ground for pouring out
such a flood of abuse, obloquy, and calumny | But Mr. Hill
goes on : “With ungodly craft he claws up the ashes of the
dead. He says Mr. Whitefield, by conversing with the
Dissenters,” (I mean chiefly the Presbyterians in New
England,) “contracted a strong prejudice against the
Church.” (Imposture Detected, p. 18.) I say so still. And
how will Mr. Hill disprove it? Why, “he manifested his
strong attachment to the Church, by erecting Tottenham
Court chapel, for the celebration of the Church Service; yea,
and reading the Liturgy himself.” Nay, if this proved his
strong attachment to the Church, it will equally prove mine;
for I have read the Liturgy as often as he, and I am now
erecting a chapel (hinc ille lachrymae /* for the celebration
of the Church Service.
5. “He cast lots for his creed.” (Page 8.) Never in my
life. That paltry story is untrue. They who tell it cast no
honour upon him who published a private letter, wrote in
confidence of friendship.
6. “He gives up the righteousness of Christ.” (Page 9.)
No more than I give up his Godhead. But I renounce both
the phrase and thing, as it is explained by Antinomian writers.
7. “He gives up the atonement of Christ. The atonement
and the righteousness of Christ he considers as mere words.”
(Page 10.) Nothing can be more false. It is not concerning
these I advise,
Projicere ampullas, et sesquipedalia verba.f
“But a man cannot fear God, and work righteousness
evangelically, without living faith.” Most certainly. And
who denies this? I have proved it an hundred times.
8. “He renounced the grand Protestant doctrine of justifica
* Hence proceed those tears.–ED1T.
+ This line from Horace's Art of Poetry is thus translated by Roscommon:
“Forget their swelling and gigantic words.”—EDIT.
IMPOSTURE DETECTED. 449
tion by faith alone, in those horrid Minutes.” I never
renounced it yet, and I trust never shall. The “horrid
Minutes.” Mr. Fletcher has so effectually vindicated, that I
wonder Mr. Hill should mention them any more.
9. “After all possible candour and forbearance had been
shown to him,” (By whom? by Mr. Toplady, Mr. Richard
Hill, or Mr. Rowland, who has excelled them all?) “this
interloper” (a pretty word, but what does it mean?) “has
totally renounced the gospel of Christ.” (Page 11.) Totally
false; unless by the gospel be meant Antinomian Calvinism.
10. “In his last year’s Minutes, he speaks of the doc
trines of grace” (Calvinism) “with as much venom as ever.”
Just as much. Let the reader judge. The words occur
page ll:
“Q. 26. Calvinism has been the greatest hinderance of the
work of God. What makes men swallow it so greedily?
“A. Because it is so pleasing to flesh and blood; the
doctrine of final perseverance in particular.
“Q. 27. What can be done to stop its progress?
“A. (1.) Let all our Preachers carefully read our tracts,
and Mr. Fletcher’s and Sellon’s.
“(2.) Let them preach universal redemption frequently and
explicitly; but in love and gentleness; taking care never to
return railing for railing. Let the Calvinists have all this on
their side.”
Ecce signum. /*
11. “He is most marvellously curious in forbidding his
Preachers to say, My Lady.”
Were ever words so distorted and misrepresented ! The
words in the Minutes are:
“Do not imitate them (the Calvinists of Trevecka in
particular) in screaming, allegorizing, calling themselves
ordained, boasting themselves of their learning, the College,
or My Lady.” (Page 12.)
Is this “forbidding them to say, My Lady?” No more
than forbidding them to make a bow.
12. “A vast number of sluts had taken possession of the
preaching-houses,” (No; the preaching-houses were not in
question,) “and female servants, by courtesy called maids,”
(civil and kind ! But neither were servants in question,) “are
* “Behold the token "-EDIT.
VOL. X. G G
450 ANswer. To MR. RowLAND HILL’s
filthy slovens in their persons, dress, and manoeuvres.” (See,
Mr. Hill understands French !) “So Mr. John gives the
public to understand.” (No, not Mr. John, but Mr. Hill.
He goes on:) “And how is this mighty grievance to be
redressed? ‘Why, says this Solomon in a cassock,” (Is not
that witty?) “‘sluts are to be kept out, by not letting them
in.’” (Imposture Detected, p. 12.) And is all this wit bestowed
upon three poor lines? The words are just these:—
“Q. Complaint is made that sluts spoil our houses. How
then can we prevent this?
“A. Let no known slut live in any of them.” (Minutes.)
What a colour does Mr. Hill put upon this ! But,
meantime, where is conscience? Where is honour?
13. “He denies the doctrines of the Church of England;”
(page 13;) that is, absolute predestination. Mr. Sellon has
abundantly proved, that this is no doctrine of the Church of
England. When Mr. Hill has answered his arguments, I will
give him some more. The objections against lay Preachers
(which come ill from Mr. Hill) I have largely answered in
the “Third Appeal to Men of Reason and Religion.” But
I know not that any lay Preachers in connexion with me,
either baptize children, or administer the Lord’s supper. I
never entreated anything of Bishop Erasmus, who had
abundant unexceptionable credentials as to his episcopal
character. Nor did he “ever reject any overture” made by
me. (Page 14.) Herein Mr. Hill has been misinformed. I
deny the fact; let him produce his evidence. The perfection
I hold is so far from being contrary to the doctrine of our
Church, that it is exactly the same which every Clergyman
prays for every Sunday: “Cleanse the thoughts of our
hearts by the inspiration of thy Holy Spirit, that we may
perfectly love thee, and worthily magnify thy holy name.”
I mean neither more nor less than this. In doctrine,
therefore, I do not dissent from the Church of England.
14. However, “he renounces the discipline of the Church.”
(Page 15.) This objection too I have answered at large, in
my Letters to Dr. Church,-another kind of opponent than
Mr. Rowland Hill; a gentleman, a scholar, and a Christian;
and as such he both spoke and wrote.
15. “He falsely says, Almost all who were educated at
Trevecka, except those that were ordained, and some of them
too, disclaimed the Church, nay, and spoke of it upon all
IMPOSTURE DETECTED, 451
occasions with exquisite bitterness and contempt.” This is a
terrible truth. If Lady Huntingdon requires it, I can
procure affidavits, both concerning the time and place.
16. “He professes he stands in no need of Christ's
righteousness.” (Page 23.) I never professed any such
thing. The very sermon referred to, the fifth in the first
volume, proves the contrary. But I flatly deny that sense of
imputed righteousness which Mr. Hill contends for.
17. “He expressly maintains the merit of good works, in
order to justification.” (Page 24.) Neither expressly nor
implicitly. I hope Mr. Hill has not read Mr. Fletcher's
Checks, nor my sermons on the subject. If he has not, he
has a poor excuse for this assertion: If he has, he can have
no excuse at all.
18. “He contradicts himself concerning Enoch and Elijah.
See his Notés, the former edition.” (Page 28.) Wisely
directed ! for Mr. Hill knew the mistake was corrected in
the next edition.
19. “He is ever raising malicious accusations against the
lives and doctrines of all Calvinists, whether Churchmen or
Dissenters, throughout all the kingdom.” (Page 29.)
Thousands of Calvinists know the contrary, both Church
men and Dissenters.
20. “He exerts all his art to irritate the civil powers
against all the people of God.” (Page 30.) “He says, the
Dissenters revile and lightly esteem the sacred person of the
King.” I answer, (1.) Are the Dissenters, are the Calvin
ists, “all the people of God?” (2.) If you think they
are, do all these defend the American rebels? Who
affirms it? I hope not a quarter, not a tenth part, of them.
(3.) Do I say, all the Dissenters revile the King? I
neither say so, nor think so. Those that do, are guilty of
what you impute to me. They “irritate the civil powers”
against themselves.
21. “He says he will no more continue in fellowship with
Calvinists than with thieves, drunkards, or common swearers.”
No; I say I will have no fellowship with those who rail at
their governors, (be they Calvinists or Arminians,) who speak
all manner of evil of them in private, if not in public too.
“Such is the character he gives of the Calvinistic Method
ists.” (Page 31.) I do not; no more than of the Arminians.
But I know there have been such among them: If they are
2 G 2
452 ANswer. To MR. RowLAND HILL’s
wiser now, I am glad. In the mean time let him wear the
cap whom it fits, be it Mr. Wilkes or Mr. Hill himself.
22. “This apostate miscreant” (civil!) “invites the King
and his ministers to fall upon”—whom ? those who “rail at
their governors, who speak all manner of evil of them, in
private, if not in public too.” I am glad they cry out, though
before they are hurt; and I hope they will cease to speak
evil of dignities, before those who bear not the sword in vain
fall upon them, not for their opinion, but their evil practices.
23. “He says, Calvinists and all Dissenters are rebels.”
(Page 32.) I never said or thought so. “But a few years
ago, he himself thought the Americans were in the right.”
I did; for then I thought that they sought nothing but
legal liberty: But as soon as I was convinced they sought
independency, I knew they were in the wrong. Mr. Evans's
low and scurrilous tracts have been confuted over and over.
24. “He trumpets himself forth as the greatest man that
has ever lived since Constantine the Great.” (Page 37.) This
too is in italics; it might have been in capitals; but it is an
utter falsehood. Mr. Hill might as well have said, “He trum
pets himself forth as the King of Great Britain.” The passage
to which I suppose he alludes, and the only one he can allude to,
is this: “When has true religion, since the time of Constantine
the Great, made so large a progress within so small a space?”
(Sermons, Vol. VII., p. 425.) Is this “trumpeting myself forth
as the greatest man that has ever lived since” then 7
25. “All his disciples are commanded not to read what is
wrote against him.” (Imposture Detected, page 38.) No; it
is the Tabernacle disciples are commanded not to read Mr.
Fletcher. And reason good; for there is no resisting the force
of his arguments. Thousands, if they read them with any
candour, would see that “God willeth all men to be saved.”
26. Mr. Hill concludes: “I should have been glad to have
addressed him in the softest and most tender style. But
those are weapons he turns to ridicule.” (Page 39.) When?
Show me a single instance. Indeed I never was tried.
What Calvinist ever addressed me in a soft and tender style?
And which of them did I turn to ridicule? I am utterly
guiltless in this matter.
II. 1. I have now done with the merits of the cause, having
refuted the charge in every article. And as to the manner,
let any man of candour judge, whether I have not spoken the
IMPOSTURE DETECTED. 453
truth in love. I proceed now to take some notice of the
manner wherein Mr. Hill speaks: To illustrate which, I need
only present a few of his flowers to the impartial reader.
2. “All the divinity we find in this wretched harangue
which he calls a sermon, are a few bungling scraps of the
religion of nature, namely, love to God and love to man,
which an Heathen might have preached as well as Mr.
John; ” (polite ) “and probably in a much better manner.
Erase half a dozen lines, and I defy any one to discover
whether the lying apostle of the Foundery be a Jew, a
Papist, a Pagan, or a Turk.” (Page 4.)
“Else I should have treated his trumpery with the silence
and contempt it deserves. But to see Mr. Whitefield scratched
out of his grave by the claws of this designing wolf.” (there is
a metaphor for you!) “is enough to make the very stones cry
out, or (which would be a greater miracle still) redden even
a Wesley's forehead with a blush.” (Page 5.) I think it
would be a greater miracle still to make a wolf blush.
“The dictatorial Mr. John lyingly maintains argument
enough for the gaping dupes whom he leads by the nose.”
(Page 6.)
“He and his lay lubbers go forth to poison the minds of
men.” (Page 11.) Are not then the lay lubbers and the
gaping dupes just fit for each other?
But who are these lay lubbers? They are “Wesley's
ragged legion of preaching tinkers, scavengers, draymen, and
chimney-sweepers.” (Page 21.)
3. “No man would do this, unless he were as unprincipled
as a rook, and as silly as a jackdaw.”
y“His own people say, ‘He is a very poor preacher;’ and
that most of his laymen, raw and ignorant as they are,
preach much more to the purpose. Indeed, the old gentleman
has lost his teeth. But should he not then cease mumbling
with his gums?” (Page 25.)
“Why do they not keep the shatter-brained old gentleman
locked up in a garret?” (Page 36)
4. “I doubt not but for profit' sake he would profess
himself a stanch Calvinist.” (Page 16.)
“The Rev. Mr. John, Mr. Whitefield’s quondam under
strapper.” (Ibid.) How sadly then did he mistake, when he
so often subscribed himself, “Your dutiful, your obliged and
affectionate, son l’’
454 ANswer. To MR. RowLAND HILL's IMPosTURE, &c.
“Mark the venom that now distils from his graceless pen.”
“The venomous quill of this gray-headed enemy to all
righteousness.” (Pages 17, 19.)
5. “The wretch thought himself safe, but the crafty
slanderer is taken in his own net.” (Page 20.)
“This truly Socinian, truly heathen, truly infernal, passage
is found in that heretic's sermon.” (Page 23.)
“The most rancorous pretences that ever actuated the
prostituted pen of a venal profligate.” (Page 30.)
“With him devils and Dissenters are terms synonymous.
If so, what a devil must he bel” (Ibid.)
“The sole merit of the disappointed Orlando Furioso.”
(how pretty and quaint that is !) “is, seeking to enkindle a
flame of ecclesiastical and civil discord:” (No; to put it out;
which, I bless God, is done already, to a great degree:)
“And his sole perfection consists in perfect hatred of all
goodness and all good men.” (Page 31.)
Now, let all the world judge between Mr. Hill and me. I
do not say all the religious world; but all that have the
smallest portion of common sense and common humanity.
Setting every thing else aside, suppose him to be my superior
in rank, fortune, learning, and understanding: Is this treat
ment for a young man to give to an old one, who, at least, is
no fool, and who, before Mr. Hill was born, was in a more
honourable employ than he is ever likely to be? What can
inspire this young hero with such a spirit, and fill his mouth
with such language? Is it any credit to his person, or to his
cause ? What can men think either of one or the other? If
he does not reverence me, or common decency, should he not
reverence himself? Why should he place himself on a level
with “the ragged legion of tinkers, scavengers, draymen,
chimney-sweepers?” Nay, there are many of these who
would be ashamed to let such language come out of their
mouth. If he writes any more, let him resume the scholar,
the gentleman, and the Christian. Let him remember Him
who “left us an example, that we might tread in his steps:
In meekness instructing those that oppose themselves, perad
venture God may bring them to the knowledge of the truth.”
LoNDoN,
June 28, 1777.
THOUGHTS
CONCER NING GOSPEL MINISTERS.
1. How frequently do we hear this expression from the
mouths of rich and poor, learned and unlearned 1 Many
lament that they have not a Gospel Minister in their church,
and therefore are constrained to seek one at the meeting.
Many rejoice that they have a Gospel Minister, and that
there are many such in their neighbourhood. Meantime,
they generally speak with much displeasure, if not contempt,
of those who they say are not Gospel Ministers.
2. But it is to be feared, few of these understand what
they say. Few understand what that expression means.
Most that use it have only crude, confused notions concerning
Gospel Ministers. And hence many inconveniences arise;
yea, much hurt to the souls of men. They contract prejudices
in favour of very worthless men, who are indeed blind leaders
of the blind; not knowing what the real gospel is, and
therefore incapable of preaching it to others. Meantime,
from the same cause, they contract prejudices against other
Ministers, who, in reality, both live and preach the gospel;
and therefore are well able to instruct them in all those
truths that accompany salvation.
3. But what then is the meaning of the expression? Who
is a Gospel Minister? Let us consider this important question
calmly, in the fear and in the presence of God.
Not every one that preaches the eternal decrees; (although
many suppose this is the very thing;) that talks much of the
sovereignty of God, of free, distinguishing grace, of dear
electing love, of irresistible grace, and of the infallible perse
verance of the saints. A man may speak of all these by the
hour together; yea, with all his heart, and with all his voice;
and yet have no right at all to the title of a Gospel Minister.
Not every one that talks largely and earnestly on those
precious subjects,—the righteousness and blood of Christ.
Let a man descant upon these in ever so lively a manner, let
456 THOUGHTS CONCERNING GOSPEL MINISTERS.
him describe his sufferings ever so pathetically; if he stops
there, if he does not show man’s duty, as well as Christ’s
sufferings; if he does not apply all to the consciences of the
hearers; he will never lead them to life, either here or here
after, and therefore is no Gospel Minister.
Not every one who deals in the promises only, without
ever showing the terrors of the law; that slides over “the
wrath of God revealed from heaven against all ungodliness
and unrighteousness,” and endeavours to heal those that
never were wounded. These promise-mongers are no Gospel
Ministers.
Not every one (very nearly allied to the former) who bends
all his strength to coax sinners to Christ. Such soft, tender
expressions, as “My dear hearers, My dear lambs,” though
repeated a thousand times, do not prove a Gospel Minister.
Lastly. Not every one that preaches justification by
faith; he that goes no farther than this, that does not insist
upon sanctification also, upon all the fruits of faith, upon
universal holiness, does not declare the whole counsel of God,
and consequently is not a Gospel Minister.
4. Who then is such? Who is a Gospel Minister, in the
full, scriptural sense of the word? He, and he alone, of
whatever denomination, that does declare the whole counsel
of God; that does preach the whole gospel, even justification
and sanctification, preparatory to glory. He that does not
put asunder what God has joined, but publishes alike, “Christ
dying for us, and Christ living in us.” He that constantly
applies all this to the hearts of the hearers, being willing
to spend and be spent for them; having himself the mind
which was in Christ, and steadily walking as Christ also
walked; he, and he alone, can with propriety be termed a
Gospel Minister.
5. Let it be particularly observed, if the gospel be “glad
tidings of great salvation which shall be unto all people,” then
those only are, in the full sense, Gospel Ministers who proclaim
the “great salvation;” that is, salvation from all (both inward
and outward) sin, into “all the mind that was in Christ
Jesus;” and likewise proclaim offers of this salvation to every
child of man. This honourable title is therefore vilely prosti
tuted, when it is given to any but those who testify “that
God willeth all men to be saved,” and “to be perfect as their
Father which is in heaven is perfect.”
THOUGHTS UPON NEC ES SIT Y.
TO THE READER.
I HAD finished what I designed to say on this subject, when the “Essay on
Liberty and Necessity” fell into my hands: A most elaborate piece, touched
and retouched with all possible care. This has occasioned a considerable
enlargement of the following tract. I would fain place mankind in a fairer
point of view than that writer has done; as I cannot believe the noblest
creature in the visible world to be only a fine piece of clock-work.
Is man a free agent, or is he not? Are his actions free
or necessary? Is he self-determined in acting; or is he
determined by some other being ? Is the principle which
determines him to act, in himself or in another? This is
the question which I want to colsider. And is it not an
important one? Surely there is not one of greater import
ance in the whole nature of things. For what is there that
more nearly concerns all that are born of women? What
can be conceived which more deeply affects, not some only,
but every child of man?
I. l. That man is not self-determined; that the principle of
action is lodged, not in himself, but in some other being; has
been an exceeding ancient opinion, yea, near as old as the
foundation of the world. It seems, none that admit of Reve
lation can have any doubt of this. For it was unquestion
ably the sentiment of Adam soon after he had eaten of the
forbidden fruit. He imputes what he had done, not to
himself, but another, “The woman whom thou gavest me.”
It was also the sentiment of Eve, “The Serpent, he beguiled
me, and I did eat.” “It is true, I did eat; but the cause of
my eating, the spring of my action, was in another.”
2. The same opinion, that man is not self-determined, took
root very early, and spread wide, particularly in the eastern
world, many ages before Manes was born. Afterwards indeed,
he, and his followers, commonly called Manichees, formed it
into a regular system. They not only maintained, that all the
458 THOUGHTS UPON NECESSITY.
actions of man were necessarily determined by a power exterior
to himself, but likewise accounted for it, by ascribing the
good to Oromasdes, the parent of all good; the evil to the
other independent being, Arimanius, the parent of all evil.
3. From the eastern world, “when arts and empire learned
to travel west,” this opinion travelled with them into Europe,
and soon found its way into Greece. Here it was earnestly
espoused and vehemently maintained by the Stoic philoso
phers; men of great renown among persons of literature, and
some of the ablest disputants in the world. These affirmed
with one mouth, that from the beginning of the world, if not
rather from all eternity, there was an indissoluble chain of
causes and effects, which included all human actions; and
that these were by fate so connected together, that not one
link of the chain could be broken.
4. A fine writer of our own country, who was a few years
since gathered to his fathers, has with admirable skill drawn
the same conclusion from different premises. He lays it
down as a principle, (and a principle it is, which cannot
reasonably be denied,) that as long as the soul is vitally
united to the body, all its operations depend on the body;
that in particular all our thoughts depend upon the vibrations
of the fibres of the brain; and of consequence vary, more
or less, as those vibrations vary. In that expression, “our
thoughts,” he comprises all our sensations, all our reflections
and passions; yea, and all our volitions, and consequently our
actions, which, he supposes, unavoidably follow those vibrations.
He premises, “But you will say, This scheme infers the
universal necessity of human actions;” and frankly adds,
“Certainly it does. I am sorry for it; but I cannot help it.”
5. And this is the scheme which is now adopted by not a
few of the most sensible men in our nation. One of these
fairly confessing, that “he did not think himself a sinner,”
was asked, “Do you never feel any wrong tempers? And
do you never speak or act in such a manner as your own
reason condemns?” He candidly answered, “Indeed I do.
I frequently feel tempers, and speak many words, and do
many actions, which I do not approve of. But I cannot
avoid it. They result, whether I will or no, from the
vibrations of my brain, together with the motion of my blood,
and the flow of my animal spirits. But these are not in my
own power. I cannot help them. They are independent on
THOUGHTS UPON NECESSITY. 459
my choice. And therefore I cannot apprehend myself to be
a sinner on this account.”
6. Very lately another gentleman, in free conversation, was
carrying this matter a little farther. Being asked, “Do you
believe God is almighty?” he answered, “I do; or he could
not have made the world.” “Do you believe he is wise?” “I
cannot tell." Much may be said on both sides.” “Do you
believe he is good?” “No; I cannot believe it. I believe
just the contrary. For all the evil in the world is owing to
Him. I can ascribe it to no other cause. I cannot blame that
cur for barking orbiting; it is his nature; and he did not make
himself. I feel wrong tempers in myself; but that is not my
fault; for I cannot help it. It is my nature; and I could
not prevent my having this nature, neither can I change it.”
7. The Assembly of Divines, who met at Westminster in
the last century, express very nearly the same sentiment,
though placed in a different light. They speak to this effect:
“Whatever happens in time, was unchangeably determined
from all eternity. God ordained or ever the world was made,
all the things that should come to pass therein. The greatest
and the smallest events were equally predetermined; in
particular, all the thoughts, all the words, all the actions of
every child of man; all that every man thinks, or speaks, or
does, from his birth, till his spirit returns to God that gave it.
It follows, that no man can do either more or less good, or
more or less evil, than he does. None can think, speak, or
act any otherwise than he does, not in any the smallest
circumstance. In all he is bound by an invisible, but more
than adamantine, chain. No man can move his head or foot,
open or shut his eyes, lift his hand, or stir a finger, any other
wise than as God determined he should, from all eternity.”
8. That this chain is invisible, they allow ; man himself
perceives nothing of it. He suspects nothing less; he
imagines himself to be free in all his actions; he seems to
move hither and thither, to go this way or that, to choose
doing evil or doing good, just at his own discretion. But all
this is an entire mistake; it is no more than a pleasing
dream: For all his ways are fixed as the pillars of heaven;
all unalterably determined. So that, notwithstanding these
gay, flattering appearances,
In spite of all the labour we create,
We only row; but we are steer'd by fate 1
460 THOUGHTS UPON NECESSITY.
9. A late writer, in his celebrated book upon free-will.
explains the matter thus: “The soul is now connected with
a material vehicle, and placed in the material world. Various
objects here continually strike upon one or other of the bodily
organs. These communicate the impression to the brain;
consequent on which such and such sensations follow. These
are the materials on which the understanding works, in
forming all its simple and complex ideas; according to which
our judgments are formed. And according to our judgments
are our passions; our love and hate, joy and sorrow, desire
and fear, with their innumerable combinations. Now, all
these passions together are the will, variously modified; and
all actions flowing from the will are voluntary actions;
consequently, they are good or evil, which otherwise they
could not be. And yet it is not in man to direct his own
way, while he is in the body, and in the world.”
10. The author of an “Essay on Liberty and Necessity,”
published some years since at Edinburgh, speaks still more
explicitly, and endeavours to trace the matter to the found
ation: “The impressions,” says he, “which man receives in
the natural world, do not correspond to the truth of things.
Thus the qualities called secondary, which we by natural
instinct attribute to Lmatter, belong not to matter, nor exist
without us; but all the beauty of colours with which heaven
and earth appear clothed, is a sort of romance or illusion.
For in external objects there is really no other distinction,
but that of the size and arrangement of their constituent
parts, whereby the rays of light are variously reflected and
refracted.” (Page 152, &c.)
“In the moral world, whatever is a cause with regard to its
proper effect, is an effect with regard to some prior cause, and
so backward without end. Events, therefore, being a train of
causes and effects, are necessary and fixed. Every one must
be, and cannot be otherwise than it is.” (Page 157, &c.)
“And yet a feeling of an opposite kind is deeply rooted in our
nature. Many things appear to us, as not predetermined by
any invariable law. We naturally make a distinction, between
things that must be, and things that may be, or may not.
“So with regard to the actions of men. We see that
connexion between an action and its motive to be so strong,
that we reason with full confidence concerning the future
+ctions of others. But if actions necessarily arise from their
THOUGHTS UPON NECESSITY. 461
proper motives, then all human actions are necessary and
fixed. Yet they do not appear so to us. Indeed, before any
particular action, we always judge, that the action will be the
necessary result of some motive. But afterwards the feeling
instantly varies. We accuse and condemn a man for doing
what is wrong. We conceive, he had a power of acting
otherwise; and the whole train of our feelings suppose him to
have been entirely a free agent.
“But what does this liberty amount to ? In all cases, our
choice is determined by some motive. It must be determined
by that motive which appears the best upon the whole. But
motives are not under our power or direction. When two
motives offer, we have not the power of choosing as we please.
We are necessarily determined.
“Man is passive in receiving impressions of things;
according to which the judgment is necessarily formed. This
the will necessarily obeys, and the outward action necessarily
follows the will.
“Hence it appears, that God decrees all future events.
He who gave such a nature to his creatures, and placed
them in such circumstances, that a certain train of actions
must necessarily follow ; he who did so, and who must have
foreseen the consequences, did certainly decree, that those
events should fall out, and that men should act just as they do.
“The Deity is the First Cause of all things. He formed
the plan on which all things were to be governed, and put it
in execution by establishing, both in the natural and moral
world, certain laws that are fixed and immutable. By virtue
of these, all things proceed in a regular train of causes and
effects, bringing about the events contained in the original
plan, and admitting the possibility of no other. This universe
is a vast machine, winded up and set a-going. The several
springs and wheels act unerringly one upon another. The
hand advances and the clock strikes, precisely as the Artist
has determined. In this plan, man, a rational creature, was
to fulfil certain ends. He was to appear as an actor, and to
act with consciousness and spontaneity. Consequently, it
was necessary he should have some idea of liberty, some
feeling of things possible and contingent, things depending on
himself, that he might be led to exercise that activity for
which he was designed. To have seen himself a part of that
great machine would have been altogether incongruous to
462 THOUGHTS UPON NECESSITY.
the ends he was to fulfil. Had he seen that nothing was
contingent, there would have been no room for forethought,
nor for any sort of industry or care. Reason could not have
been exercised in the way it is now; that is, man could not
have been man. But now, the moment he comes into the
world, he acts as a free agent. And contingency, though it
has no real existence in things, is made to appear as really
existing. Thus is our natural feeling directly opposite to
truth and matter of fact; seeing it is certainly impossible,
that any man should act any otherwise than he does.”
See necessity drawn at full length, and painted in the most
lively colours!
II. 1. It is easy to observe, that every one of these schemes
implies the universal necessity of human actions. In this
they all agree, that man is not a free but a necessary agent,
being absolutely determined in all his actions by a principle
exterior to himself. But they do not agree what that principle
is. The most ancient of them, the Manichaean, maintained,
that men are determined to evil by the evil god, Arimanius;
that Oromasdes, the good God, would have prevented or
removed that evil, but could not; the power of the evil god.’
being so great, that he is not able to control it.
2. The Stoics, on the other hand, did not impute the evil
that is in the world to any intelligent principle, but either to
the original stubbornness of matter, which even divine power
was not capable of removing; to the concatenation of causes
and effects, which no power whatever could alter; or to
unconquerable fate, to which they supposed all the gods, the
Supreme not excepted, to be subject.
3. The author of two volumes, entitled “Man,” rationally
rejects all the preceding schemes, while he deduces all human
actions from those passions and judgments which, during the
present union of the soul and body, necessarily result from
such and such vibrations of the fibres of the brain. Herein
he indirectly ascribes the necessity of all human actions
to God; who, having fixed the laws of this vital union
according to his own good pleasure, having so constituted
man that the motions of the soul thus depend on the fibres
of the body, has thereby laid him under an invincible neces
sity of acting thus, and in no other manner. So do those
likewise, who suppose all the judgments and passions neces
sarily to flow from the motion of the blood and spirits. For
ThouGHTS UPON NECESSIT Y. 463
this is indirectly to impute all our passions and actions to
Him who alone determined the manner wherein our blood
and spirits should move.
4. The gentleman next mentioned does this directly, without
any softening or circumlocution at all. He flatly and roundly
affirms, The Creator is the proper Author of everything
which man does; that by creating him thus, he has absolutely
determined the manner wherein he shall act; and that there
fore man can no more help sinning, than a stone can help
falling. The Assembly of Divines do as directly ascribe the
necessity of human actions to God, in affirming that God has
eternally determined whatsoever shall be done in time. So
likewise does Mr. Edwards of New-England; in proving by
abundance of deep, metaphysical reasoning, that “we must
see, hear, taste, feel the objects that surround us, and must
have such judgments, passions, actions, and no other.” He
flatly ascribes the necessity of all our actions to Him who
united our souls to these bodies, placed us in the midst of
these objects, and ordered that these sensations, judgments,
passions, and actions should spring therefrom.
5. The author last cited connects together and confirms all
the preceding schemes; particularly those of the ancient
Stoics and the modern Calvinists.
III. 1. It is not easy for a man of common understanding,
especially if unassisted by education, to unravel these finely
woven schemes, or show distinctly where the fallacy lies.
But he knows, he feels, he is certain, they cannot be true;
that the holy God cannot be the author of sin. The horrid
consequences of supposing this may appear to the meanest
understanding, from a few plain, obvious considerations, of
which every man that has common sense may judge.
If all the passions, the tempers, the actions of men, are
wholly independent on their own choice, are governed by a
principle exterior to themselves, then there can be no moral
good or evil; there can be neither virtue nor vice, neither
good nor bad actions, neither good nor bad passions or tempers.
The sun does much good; but it is no virtue; but he is not
capable of moral goodness. Why is he not? For this plain
reason, because he does not act from choice. The sea does
much harm: It swallows up thousands of men; but it is not
capable of moral badness, because it does not act by choice,
but from a necessity of mature. If indeed one or the other
464 TIHOUGHTS UPON NECESSITY.
can be said to act at all. Properly speaking, it does not : It
is purely passive: It is only acted upon by the Creator; and
must move in this manner and no other, seeing it cannot
resist His will. In like manner, St. Paul did much good:
But it was no virtue, if he did not act from choice. And if he
was in all things necessitated to think and act, he was not
capable of moral goodness. Nero does much evil; murders
thousands of men, and sets fire to the city: But it is no fault;
he is not capable of moral badness, if he does not act from
choice, but necessity. Nay, properly, the man does not act at
all : He is only acted upon by the Creator, and must move thus,
being irresistibly impelled. For who can resist his will?
2. Again: If all the actions, and passions, and tempers of
men are quite independent on their own choice, are governed
by a principle exterior to themselves; then none of them is
either rewardable or punishable, is either praise or blame
worthy. The consequence is undeniable: I cannot praise the
sun forwarming, nor blame the stone for wounding me; because
neither the sun nor the stone acts from choice, but from neces
sity. Therefore, neither does the latter deserve blame, nor the
former deserve praise. Neither is the one capable of reward,
nor the other of punishment. And if a man does good as
necessarily as the sun, he is no more praiseworthy than that; if
he does evil as necessarily as the stone, he is no more blame
worthy. The dying to save your country is noway rewardable,
if you are compelled thereto; and the betraying your country
is noway punishable, if you are necessitated to do it.
3. It follows, if there be no such thing as virtue or vice, as
moral good or evil, if there be nothing rewardable or punish
able in the actions or passions of men, then there can be no
judgment to come, and no future rewards and punishments.
For might not God as well judge the trees of the wood, or
the stones of the field, as man, if man was as totally passive
as they? as irresistibly determined to act thus or thus?
What should he be commended or rewarded for, who never
did any good but when he could not help it, being impelled
thereto by a force which he could not withstand? What
should he be blamed or punished for, who never did any evil,
to which he was not determined by a power he could no more
resist, than he could shake the pillars of heaven?
This objection the author of the Essay gives in its full
strength: “The advocates for liberty reason thus: If actions
THOUGHTS UPON NECESSITY. 465
be necessary, and not in our own power, what ground is there
for blame, self-condemnation, or remorse? If a clock were
sensible of its own motions, and knew that they proceeded
according to necessary laws, could it find fault with itself for
striking wrong? Would it not blame the artist, who had so
ill adjusted the wheels? So that, upon this scheme, all the
moral constitution of our nature is overturned; there is an
end to all the operations of conscience, about right and
wrong; man is no longer a moral agent, nor the subject of
praise or blame for what he does.”
He strangely answers: “Certainly the pain, the remorse,
which is felt by any man who had been guilty of a bad action,
springs from the notion, that he has a power over his own
actions, that he might have forborne to do it. It is on this
account, that he is angry at himself, and confesses himself to
be blamable. That uneasiness proceeds on the supposition,
that he is free, and might have acted a better part. And
one under the dominion of bad passions is condemned upon
this ground, that it was in his power to be free from them.
Were not this the case, brutes might be the objects of moral
blame as well as man. But we do not blame them, because
they have not freedom, a power of directing their own actions.
We : therefore admit, that the idea of freedom is
essential to the moral feeling. On the system of universal
necessity, there could be no place for blame or remorse.
And we struggle in vain to reconcile to this system the
testimony which conscience clearly gives to freedom.”
Is this an answer to the objection ? Is it not fairly giving
up the whole cause ?
He adds: “A feeling of liberty, which I now scruple not
to call deceitful, is interwoven with our nature. Man must
be so constituted, in order to attain virtue.” To attain
virtue / Nay, you have yourself allowed, that, on this
supposition, virtue and vice can have no being. You go on :
“If he saw himself as he really is,” (Sir, do not you see
yourself so?) “if he conceived himself and all his actions
necessarily linked into the great chain, which renders the
whole order both of the natural and moral world unalterably
determined in every article, what would follow ** Why,
just nothing at all. The great chain must remain as it was
before; since whatever you see or conceive, that i
“unalterably determined in every article.”
VOL. X. H H
466 THOUGHTS UPON NECESSITY.
To confute himself still more fully, he says, “If we knew
good and evil to be necessary and unavoidable,” (contradiction
in terms; but let it pass,) “there would be no more place for
praise or blame; no indignation at those who had abused
their rational powers; no sense of just punishment annexed
to crimes, or of any reward deserved by good actions. All
these feelings vanish at once, with the feeling of liberty.
And the sense of duty must be quite extinguished: For we
cannot conceive any moral obligation, without supposing a
power in the agent over his own actions.”
If so, what is he who publishes a book to show mankind
that they have no power over their own actions?
To the objection, that this scheme “makes God the author
of sin,” the Essayist feebly answers: “Sin, or moral turpitude,
lies in the evil intention of him that commits it, or in some
wrong affection. Now, there is no wrong intention in God.”
What then? Whatever wrong intention or affection is in
man, you make God the direct author of it. For you flatly
affirm, “Moral evil cannot exist, without being permitted of
God. And with regard to a first cause, permitting is the
same thing as causing.” That I totally deny: But if it be,
God is the proper cause of all the sin in the universe.
4. Suppose, now, the Judge of all the earth,-having just
pronounced the awful sentence, “Depart, ye cursed, into
everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels,”—
should say to one on the left hand, “What canst thou offer
in thy own behalf?” Might he not, on this scheme, answer,
“Lord, why am I doomed to dwell with everlasting burn
ings? For not doing good? Was it ever in my power to
do any good action? Could I ever do any, but by that grace
which thou hadst determined not to give me? For doing
evil? Lord, did I ever do any, which I was not bound to do
by thy own decree? Was there ever a moment when it was
in my power, either to do good, or to cease from evil? Didst
not thou fix whatever I should do, or not do, or ever I came
into the world? And was there ever one hour, from my
cradle to my grave, wherein I could act otherwise than I
did?” Now, let any man say whose mouth would be
stopped, that of the criminal or the Judge.
5. But if, upon this supposition, there can be no judgment
to come, and no future rewards or punishments, it likewise
follows, that the Scriptures, which assert both, cannot be of
THOUGHTS UPON NECESSITY, 467
divine original. If there be not “a day wherein God will
judge the world, by that Man whom he hath appointed;” if
the wicked shall not go into eternal punishment, neither the
righteous into life eternal; what can we think of that book
which so frequently and solemnly affirms all these things?
We can no longer maintain, that “all Scripture was given
by inspiration of God,” since it is impossible that the God of
truth should be the author of palpable falsehoods. So that,
whoever asserts the pre-determination of all human actions,
a doctrine totally inconsistent with the scriptural doctrines of
a future judgment, heaven and hell, strikes hereby at the
very foundation of Scripture, which must necessarily stand
or fall with them.
6. Such absurdities will naturally and necessarily follow
from the scheme of necessity. But Mr. Edwards has found
out a most ingenious way of evading this consequence: “I
grant,” says that good and sensible man, “if the actions of
men were involuntary, the consequence would inevitably
follow,-they could not be either good or evil; nor, therefore,
could they be the proper object either of reward or punish
ment. But here lies the very ground of your mistake; their
actions are not involuntary. The actions of men are quite
voluntary; the fruit of their own will. They love, they
desire, evil things; therefore they commit them. But love
and hate, desire and aversion, are only several modes of
willing. Now, if men voluntarily commit theft, adultery, or
murder, certainly the actions are evil, and therefore punish
able. And if they voluntarily serve God, and help their
neighbours, the actions are good, and therefore rewardable.”
7. I cannot possibly allow the consequence, upon Mr.
Edwards's supposition. Still I say, if they are necessitated to
commit robbery or murder, they are not punishable for commit
ting it. But you answer, “Nay, their actions are voluntary,
the fruit of their own will.” If they are, yet that is not enough
to make them either good or evil. For their will, on your sup
position, is irresistibly impelled; so that they cannot help will
ing thus or thus. If so, they are no more blamable for that
will, than for the actions which follow it. There is no blame if
they are under a necessity of willing. There can be no moral
good or evil, unless they have liberty as well as will, which is
entirely a different thing. And the not adverting to this seems
to be the direct occasion of Mr. Edwards's whole mistake.
2 H 2
468 THOUGHTS UPON NECESSITY.
8. God created man an intelligent being; and endued
him with will as well as understanding. Indeed, it seems,
without this, his understanding would have been given to no
purpose. Neither would either his will or understanding
have answered any valuable purpose, if liberty had not been
added to them, a power distinct from both; a power of
choosing for himself, a self-determining principle. It may
be doubted whether God ever made an intelligent creature
without all these three faculties; whether any spirit ever
existed without them; yea, whether they are not implied in
the very nature of a spirit. Certain it is, that no being can
be accountable for its actions, which has not liberty, as well
as will and understanding.
How admirably is this painted by Milton, supposing God
to speak concerning his new-made creature l—
“I made him just and right,
Sufficient to have stood, though free to fall.
Such I created all the ethereal powers, –
Freely they stood who stood, and fell who fell.
Not free, what proof could they have given sincere
Of true allegiance, constant faith and love,
Where only what they needs must do appear'd,
Not what they would P What praise could they receive,
What pleasure I, from such obedience paid,
When will and reason, (reason also is choice.)
Useless and vain, of freedom both despoil'd,
Made passive both, had served necessity,
Not me * They therefore, as to right belong’d,
So were created
So without least impulse or shadow of fate,
Or aught by me immutably foreseen,
They trespass, authors to themselves in all
Both what they judge and what they choose: For so
I form'd them free; and free they must remain,
Till they enthral themselves. I else must change
Their nature, and reverse the high decree,
Unchangeable, eternal, which ordain'd
Their freedom; they themselves ordain'd their fall.”
Paradise Lost, Book III.
9. It seems, they who divide the faculties of the human
soul into the understanding, will, and affections, unless they
make the will and affections the same thing; (and then how
inaccurate is the division 1) must mean by affections, the will,
properly speaking, and by the term will, neither more nor
less than liberty; the power of choosing either to do or not to
do, (commonly called liberty of contradiction,) or to do this
ThouGHTS UPON NECESSITY. 469
or the contrary, good or evil (commonly called liberty of con
trariety). Without the former at least, there can be nothing
good or evil, rewardable or punishable. But it is plain, the
doctrine of necessity, as taught either by ancient Heathens,
or by the moderns, (whether Deists or Christians,) destroys
both, leaves not a shadow of either, in any soul of man:
Consequently, it destroys all the morality of human actions,
making man a mere machine; and leaves no room for any
judgment to come, or for either rewards or punishments.
IV. 1. But whatever be the consequences deducible from
this, that all human actions are necessary, how will you
answer the arguments which are brought in defence of this
position? Let us try whether something of this kind may
not be done in a few words.
Indeed, as to the first scheme, that of the Manichees, the
maintainers of a good and an evil god, though it was formerly
espoused by men of renown, St. Augustine in particular; yet
it is now so utterly out of date, that it would be lost labour
to confute it. A little more plausible is this scheme of the
Stoics', building necessity upon fate, upon the insuperable
stubbornness of matter, or the indissoluble chain of causes
and effects. Perhaps they invented this scheme to exculpate
God, to avoid laying the blame upon him, by allowing He
would have done better if he could; that he was willing to
cure the evil, but was not able. But we may answer them
short, There is no fate above the Most High; that is an idle,
irrational fiction. Neither is there anything in the nature of
matter, which is not obedient to his word. The Almighty is
able, in the twinkling of an eye, to reduce any matter into
any form he pleases; or to speak it into nothing; in a
moment to expunge it out of his creation.
2. The still more plausible scheme of Dr. Hartley, (and I
might add, those of the two gentlemen above-mentioned,
which nearly coincide with it,) now adopted by almost all
who doubt of the Christian system, requires a more particular
consideration, were it only because it has so many admirers.
And it certainly contains a great deal of truth, as will appear
to any that considers it calmly. For who can deny, that not
only the memory, but all the operations of the soul, are now
dependent on the bodily organs, the brain in particular?
insomuch that a blow on the back part of the head (as
frequent cxperience shows) may take away the understanding,
470 THOUGHTS UPON NECERSITY.
and destroy at once both sensation and reflection; and an
irregular flow of spirits may quickly turn the deepest philoso
pher into a madman. We must allow likewise, that while the
very power of thinking depends so much upon the brain, our
judgments must needs depend thereon, and in the same pro
portion. It must be farther allowed, that, as our sensations,
our reflections, and our judgments, so our will and passions
also, which naturally follow from our judgments, ultimately
depend on the fibres of the brain. But does all this infer the
total necessity of all human actions? “I am sorry for it,”
says the Doctor; “but I cannot help it.” I verily think I can.
I think I can not only cut the knot, by showing (as above)
the intolerable absurdities which this scheme implies; but
fairly untie it, by pointing out just where the fallacy lies.
3. But first permit me to say a word to the author of the
Essay. His grand reason for supposing all mankind in a
dream, is drawn from analogy: “We are in a continual
delusion as to the natural world; why not as to the moral?”
Well; how does he prove, that we are in a continual delusion
as to the natural world? Thus: “All the qualities which
are termed secondary qualities, we by a natural instinct
ascribe to matter. But it is a mere deceit. They do not
belong to matter, neither exist without us.”
As commonly as this is asserted, it is absolutely false, as
will appear quickly.
You instance in colours, and confidently say, “All this
beauty of colours, with which heaven and earth appear to be
clothed, is a sort of romance or illusion. In external objects
there is no other distinction but that of the size and arrange
ment of their constituent parts, whereby the rays of light are
variously reflected or refracted.”
But are those rays of light real? And do they exist without
us? Certainly, as much as the sun does. And are the consti
tuent parts of those objects real? Nobody questions it. But
are they really of such a size, and arranged in such a manner?
They are; and what will you infer from that? I infer, that
colour is just as real as size or figure; and that all colours do
as really exist without us, as trees, or corn, or heaven, or earth.
“But what do you mean by colour?” When I say,
“That cloth is of a red colour,” I mean its surface is so dis
posed as to reflect the red (that is, the largest) rays of light.
When I say, “The sky is blue,” I mean, it is so disposed as
THOUGHTS UPON NECESSITY. 471
to reflect the blue (that is, the smallest) rays of light. And
where is the delusion here? Does not that disposition, do not
those rays, as really exist, as either the cloth or the sky?
And are they not as really reflected, as the ball in a tennis
court? It is true, that, when they strike upon my eye, a
particular sensation follows in my soul. But that sensation is
not colour; I know no one that calls it so. Colour therefore
is a real material thing. There is no illusion in the case,
unless you confound the perception with the thing perceived.
And all other secondary qualities are just as real as figure or
any other primary one. So you have no illusion in the
natural world to countenance that you imagine to be in the
moral. Wherever, therefore, this argument occurs, (and it
occurs ten times over,)—“The natural world is all illusion;
therefore, so is the moral,”—it is just good for nothing.
But, take it all together, and what a supposition is this ! Is
it not enough to make one's blood run cold 2 “The great
God, the Creator of heaven and earth, the Father of the spirits
of all flesh, the God of truth, has encompassed with falsehood
every soul that he has made I has given up all mankind ‘to a
strong delusion, to believe a lie! yea, all his creation is a
lie; all the natural and all the moral world !” If so, you
make God himself, rather than the devil, (horrid thought !)
“the father of lies !” Such you doubtless represent him,
when you say, not only that he has surrounded us with
illusion on every side; but that the feelings which he has
interwoven with our inmost nature are equally illusive
That all these shadows, which for things we take,
Are but the empty dreams which in death's sleep we make I
And yet, after this, you make a feint of disputing in defence
of a material world ! Inconsistency all over ! What proof
have we of this, what possible proof can we have, if we cannot
trust our own eyes, or ears, or any or all of our senses? But
it is certain I can trust none of my senses, if I am a mere
machine. For I have the testimony of all my outward and
all my inward senses, that I am a free agent. If therefore I
cannot trust them in this, I can trust them in nothing. Do
not tell me there are sun, moon, and stars, or that there are
men, beasts, or birds, in the world. I cannot believe one
tittle of it, if I cannot believe what I feel in myself, namely,
that it depends on me, and no other being, whether I shall
now open or shut my eyes, move my head hither and thither,
472 THOUGHTS UPON NECESSITY.
or stretch my hand or my foot. If I am necessitated to do
all this, contrary to the whole both of my inward and outward
senses, I can believe nothing else, but must necessarily sink
into universal scepticism.
Let us now weigh the main argument on which this author
builds the melancholy hypothesis of necessity: “Actions neces
sarily arise from their several motives: Therefore, all human
actions are necessary.” Again: “In all cases the choice must
be determined by that motive which appears the best upon the
whole. But motives are not under our power. Man is passive
in receiving impressions of things, according to which the last
judgment is necessarily formed. This the will necessarily
obeys, and the outward action necessarily follows the will.”
Let us take this boasted argument in pieces, and survey it
part by part. (1) “Motives are not under our power.” This
is not universally true: Some are, some are not. That man
has a strong motive to run his neighbour through, namely,
violent anger; and yet the action does not necessarily follow.
Often it does not follow at all; and where it does, not neces
sarily: He might have resisted that motive. (2) “In all
cases the choice must be determined by that motive which
appears the best upon the whole.” This is absolutely false.
It is flatly contrary to the experience of all mankind. Who
may not say on many occasions, Video meliora 2* I know
what I do, is not “best upon the whole?” (3.) “Man is
passive in receiving the impressions of things.” Not
altogether. Even here much depends on his own choice.
In many cases he may or may not receive the impression; in
most he may vary it greatly. (4.) “According to these his
last judgment is necessarily formed.” Nay, this too depends
much upon his choice. Sometimes his first, sometimes his
last, judgment, is according to the impressions which he has
received; and frequently it is not. (5.) “This the will
necessarily obeys.” Indeed it does not. The mind has an
intrinsic power of cutting off the connexion between the
judgment and the will. (6) “And the outward action
necessarily follows the will.” Not so. The thing I would, I
do not; and the thing I would not, that I do. Whatever
then becomes of the chain of events, this chain of argument
has not one good link belonging to it.
* This quotation from Ovid is thus translated by Tate :
“I see my error, yet to ruin move.”–ED1T.
THOUGHTS UPON NECESSITY. 473
4. But allowing all he contends for, -that upon such vibra
tions of the brain, such sensations directly follow, and indi
rectly, as the various combinations and results of them, all
our judgments and passions, and consequently words and
actions; yet this infers no necessity at all, if there be a God
in the world. Upon this the whole matter turns. And,
“This circumstance the Doctor had forgot.” And so indeed
have almost the whole tribe of modern philosophers. They do
not at all take God into their account; they can do their whole
business without him... But in truth this their wisdom is
their folly; for no system, either of morality or philosophy,
can be complete, unless God be kept in view, from the very
beginning to the end. Every true philosopher will surely go
at least as far as the poor heathen poet:
Ek Atos apxacue6a, kalew Au Anyere Maloal.
“Muses, begin and end with God supreme !”
Now, if there be a God, he cannot but have all power over
every creature that he has made. He must have equal
power over matter and spirits, over our souls and bodies.
What are then all the vibrations of the brain to him? or
all the natural consequences of them ? Suppose there be
naturally the strongest concatenation of vibrations, sensations,
reflections, judgments, passions, actions; cannot He, in a
moment, whenever and however He pleases, destroy that
concatemation ? Cannot he cut off, or suspend, in any degree,
the connexion between vibrations and sensations, between
sensations and reflections, between reflections and judgments,
and between judgments and passions or actions? We cannot
have any idea of God’s omnipotence, without seeing He can
do this if he will.
5. “If he will,” you may say, “we know he can. But
have we any reason to think he will?” Yes; the strongest
reason in the world, supposing that God is love; more especi
ally, suppose he “is loving to every man,” and that “his
mercy is over all his works.” If so, it cannot be, that he
should see the noblest of his creatures under heaven neces
sitated to evil, and incapable of any relief but from himself,
without affording that relief. It is undeniable, that he has
fixed in man, in every man, his umpire, conscience; an inward
judge, which passes sentence both on his passions and actions,
either approving or condemning them. Indeed it has not
474 A THOUGHT ON NECESSITY.
power to remove what it condemns; it shows the evil which
it cannot cure. But the God of power can cure it; and the
God of love will, if we choose he should. But he will no more
necessitate us to be happy, than he will permit anything
beneath the sun to lay us under a necessity of being
miserable. I am not careful therefore about the flowing of
my blood and spirits, or the vibrations of my brain; being
well assured, that, however my spirits may flow, or my nerves
and fibres vibrate, the Almighty God of love can control them
all, and will (unless I obstinately choose vice and misery)
afford me such help, as, in spite of all these, will put it into
my power to be virtuous and happy for ever.
GLAsgow,
May 14, 1774.
A THOUGHT ON NEC ES SITY.
I. 1. THE late ingenious Dr. Hartley, in his “Essay on
Man,” resolves all thought into vibrations of the brain. When
any of the fine fibres of the brain are moved, so as to vibrate
to and fro, then (according to his scheme) a perception or
sensation is the natural consequence. These sensations are
at first simple, but are afterwards variously compounded; till,
by farther vibrations, ideas of reflection are added to ideas of
sensation. By the additional vibrations of this curious organ
our judgments of things are also formed; and from the same
fruitful source arise our reasonings in their endless variety.
2. From our apprehensions of things, from our judgments
and reasonings concerning them, all our passions arise;
whether those which are more sudden and transient, or those
of a permanent nature. And from the several mixtures and
modifications of these, our tempers or dispositions flow; very
nearly, if not altogether, the same with what are usually
termed virtues or vices.
3. Our passions and tempers are the immediate source of all
our words and actions. Of consequence, these likewise depend
ing on our passions, and our passions on our judgments and
A THOUGHT ON NECESSITY. 475
apprehensions, all our actions, passions, and judgments are
ultimately resolvable into the vibrations of the brain. And
all of them together follow each other in one connected chain.
4. “But you will say,” (says the Doctor) “This infers the
universal necessity of human actions. I am sorry for it; but
I cannot help it.” But since he saw, this destroyed that very
essence of morality, leaving no room for either virtue or vice,
why did he publish it to the world? Why? Because his
brain vibrated in such a manner, that he could not help it.
Alas for poor human nature ! If this is so, where is “the
dignity of man?”
II. 1. But other great men totally disapprove of the doctrine
of vibration. They give an entirely different account of this
whole affair. They say, the delicate, soft, and almost fluid
substance, of which the brain is composed, is absolutely
incapable of such vibrations as the Doctor ascribes to it; but
that the animal spirits, whatever they are, continually moving
through that soft substance, naturally form various traces
therein; first, very simple, then less or more compounded;
that these are afterward varied innumerable ways; and that
from these simple or compounded traces arise simple or
compounded ideas, whether of sensation or reflection. From
these result the judgments we form, with all our train of
reasonings; and, at a little farther remove, our passions, our
tempers, and from these our words and actions.
2. It is easy to observe, that this scheme equally infers the
universal necessity of human actions. The premises indeed
are a little different, but the conclusion is one and the same.
If every thought, word, and action necessarily depends upon
those traces in the brain, which are formed whether we will
or no, without either our consent or knowledge; then the
man has no more liberty in thinking, speaking, or acting,
than the stone has in falling.
III. That great man, President Edwards, of New-England,
places this in a still stronger light. He says,—
1. The whole frame of this world wherein we are placed is
so constituted, that, without our choice, visible objects affect
our eyes, sounds strike upon the ear, and the other things
which surround us affect the other bodily organs, according
to their several natures.
2. The nerves, which are spread all over the body, without
anv choice of ours, convey the impression made on the out
476 A THOUGHT ON NECESSITY.
ward organ to the common sensory; supposed to be lodged
either in the pineal gland, or in some other part of the brain.
3. Immediately, without our choice, the perception or
sensation follows: And from this,
4. The simple apprehension, (analogous to sensation,) which
furnishes us with simple ideas.
5. These ideas are more and more associated together, still
without our choice; and we understand, judge, reason accord
ingly; yea, love, hate, joy, grieve, hope, or fear.
6. And according to our passions we speak and act. Where
is liberty then? It is excluded. All you see, is one con
nected chain, fixed as the pillars of heaven.
IV. To the same effect, though with a little variation,
speaks the ingenious Lord Kames. He says,—
The universe is one immense machine, one amazing piece
of clock-work, consisting of innumerable wheels fitly framed,
and indissolubly linked together. Man is one of these wheels,
fixed in the middle of this vast automaton. And he moves
just as necessarily as the rest, as the sun or moon, or earth.
Only with this difference, (which was necessary for completing
the design of the great Artificer,) that he seems to himself
perfectly free; he imagines that he is unnecessitated, and
master of his own motion; whereas in truth he no more directs
or moves himself, than any other wheel in the machine.
The general inference then is still the same; the point
which all these so laboriously endeavour to prove is, that
inevitable necessity governs all things, and men have no
more liberty than stones.
V. 1. But allowing all this; allowing (in a sense) all that
Dr. Hartley, Edwards, and their associates contend for;
what discovery have they made? What new thing have they
found out? What does all this amount to? With infinite
pains, with immense parade, with the utmost ostentation of
mathematical and metaphysical learning, they have discovered
just as much as they might have found in one single line of
the Bible.
“Without me ye can do nothing !” absolutely, positively
nothing ! seeing, in Him all things live and move, as well as
have their being; seeing, he is not only the true primum
mobile, containing the whole frame of creation, but likewise the
inward, sustaining, acting principle, indeed the only proper
agent in the universe; unless so far as he imparts a spark of
A THOUGHT ON NECESSITY. 477
his active, self-moving nature to created spirits. But more
especially “ye can do nothing” right, nothing wise, nothing
good, without the direct, immediate agency of the First
Cause.
2. Let the trial be made. And First, what can reason,
all-sufficient reason, do in this matter? Let us try, upon
Dr. Hartley’s scheme. Can it prevent or alter the vibrations
of the brain? Can it prevent or alter the various compo
sitions of them ? or cut off the cqnnexion between these, and
our apprehensions, judgments, reasonings? or between these
and our passions? or that between our passions, and our
words and actions? Not at all. Reason can do nothing in
this matter. In spite of all our reason, nature will keep its
course, will hold on its way, and utterly bear down its feeble
opponent.
3. And what can reason do, upon the second supposition?
Can it prevent or alter the traces in the brain? Not a jot
more than it could the vibrations. They laugh at all its
power. Can it cut off the connexion between those traces
and our apprehensions; or that between our apprehensions
and our passions; or between our passions and actions? No
thing at all of this. It may see the evil, but it cannot help it.
4. Try what reason can do, upon the third supposition,
that of President Edwards. Can it change the appearances
of the things that surround us? or the impression which the
nerves convey to the common sensory? or the sensation that
follows? or the apprehension? Or can it cut off the con
nexion between our apprehensions of things and our
passions? or that between our passions and our actions?
Poor, impotent reason It can do neither more nor less in
any of these matters. It cannot alter the outward constitu
tion of things; the nature of light, sound, or the other objects
that surround us. It cannot prevent their affecting our senses
thus and thus. And then, will not all the rest follow 7
5. Make a trial, if reason can do any more, upon Lord
Kames’s supposition. Can it in any degree alter the nature
of the universal machine? Can it change or stop the
motion of any one wheel? Utterly impossible.
6. Has free-will any more power in these respects than
reason? Let the trial be made upon each of these schemes.
What can it do upon Dr. Hartley’s scheme? Can our
free-will alter one vibration of the brain? What can it do
478 A THOUGHT ON NECESSITY.
upon the second scheme? Can it erase or alter one of the
traces formed there? What can it do upon Mr. Edwards's?
Can it alter the appearances of the things that surround us?
or the impressions they make upon the nerves? or the
natural consequences of them? Can it do anything more on
Lord Kames’s scheme? Can it anyways alter the constitu
tion of the great clock 2 Stand still ! Look awhile into
your own breast ! What can your will do in any of these
matters? Ah, poor free-will! Does not plain experience
show, it is as impotent as your reason? Let it stand then as
an eternal truth, “Without me ye can do nothing.”
VI. 1. But in the same old book there is another word:
“I can do all things through Christ strengthening me.”
Here the charm is dissolved ! The light breaks in, and the
shadows flee away.
One of these sentences should never be viewed apart from
the other: Each receives light from the other. God hath
joined them together, and let no man put them asunder.
Now, taking this into the account, I care not one pin for
all Dr. Hartley can say of his vibrations. Allowing the
whole which he contends for, allowing all the links of his
mathematical chain to be as indissolubly joined together as
are the propositions in Euclid; suppose vibrations, per
ceptions, judgments, passions, tempers, actions, ever so
naturally to follow each other: What is all this to the God of
nature? Cannot he stop, alter, annihilate any or all of these,
in whatever manner, and in whatever moment he pleases?
Away then with all these fine-wrought speculations ! Sweep
them off as a spider's web | Scatter them in the wind
How helpless soever they may be “who are without God in
the world;” however they may groan under the iron hand of
dire necessity; necessity has no power over those “who have
the Lord for their God.” Each of these can say, through
happy experience, “I can do all things through Christ
strengthening me.”
2. Again: Allowing all the minute philosophers can say, of
the traces formed in the brain, and of perceptions, judgments,
passions, tempers, words, and actions naturally flowing there
from: Whatever dreadful consequences may follow from
hence, with regard to those who know not God, who have
only natural reason and free-will to oppose the power of
nature; (which we know to have no more force than a thread
A THOUGHT ON NECESSITY. 479
of tow that has touched the fire;) under the influence of the
God of nature, we laugh all our enemies to scorn. He can
alter or efface all these traces in a moment, in the twinkling
of an eye. Still, although “without Him I can do nothing,”
“I can do all things through Christ strengthening me.”
3. Yet again: Let Mr. Edwards say all he will or can,
concerning the outward appearances of things, as giving rise
to sensations, association of ideas, passions, dispositions, and
actions; allowing this to be the course of nature: What then?
See One superior to nature ! What is the course of nature
to Him? By a word, a nod, he turneth it upside down!
His power inverted Nature owns,
Her only law his sov’reign word.
Let your chain be wrought ever so firm; He nods, and it
flies in pieces; He touches it, and all the links fall asunder,
as unconnected as the sand.
4. Once more: After Lord Kames has said all he pleases
concerning the grand machine of the universe, and con
cerning the connexion of its several wheels, yet it must be
allowed, He that made it can unmake it; can vary every
wheel, every spring, every movement, at his own good
pleasure. Neither, therefore, does this imply any necessity
laid either upon the thoughts, passions, or actions, of those
that know and trust in Him who is the Creator and
Governor of heaven and earth.
5. Ah, poor Infidel! this is no comfort to you ! You
must plunge on in the fatal whirlpool | You are without
hope; without help! For there is only one possible help;
and that you spurn. What follows then? Why
Si figit adamantinos
Summis verticibus dira necessitas
Clavos; non animum metu,
Non mortis laqueis expedies caput.*
O what advantage has a Christian (a real Christian) over an
Infidel ! He sees God! Consequently
* This quotation from Horace is thus translated by Francis :
“Yet soon as Fate shall round your head,
With adamantine strength, its terrors spread,
Not the Dictator's power shall save
Your soul from fear, your body from the grave.”–EDIT.
480 ADDRESS TO THE CLERGY.
Metus omnes, et inerorabile fatum
Subjecit pedibus, strepitumque Acherontis avari.
He tramples on inexorable fate,
And fear, and death, and hell !
6. Ah, poor predestinarian | If you are true to your
doctrine, this is no comfort to you! For perhaps you are
not of the elect number: If so, you are in the whirlpool too.
For what is your hope? Where is your help? There is no
help for you in your God. Your God! No; he is not
yours; he never was; he never will be. He that made you,
He that called you into being, has no pity upon you ! He
made you for this very end,—to damn you; to cast you
headlong into a lake of fire burning with brimstone ! This
was prepared for you, or ever the world began | And for
this you are now reserved in chains of darkness, till the
decree brings forth; till, according to his eternal, unchange
able, irresistible will,
You groan, you howl, you writhe in waves of fire,
And pour forth blasphemies at his desire!
O God, how long shall this doctrine stand I
AN ADDRESS TO THE CLER GY.
BRETHREN AND FATHERs,
LET it not be imputed to forwardness, vanity, or pre
sumption, that one who is of little esteem in the Church
takes upon him thus to address a body of people, to many of
whom he owes the highest reverence. I owe a still higher
regard to Him who I believe requires this at my hands; to
the great Bishop of our souls; before whom both you and I
must shortly give an account of our stewardship. It is a
debt I owe to love, to real, disinterested affection, to declare
what has long been the burden of my soul. And may
the God of love enable you to read these lines in the same
spirit wherewith they were wrote It will easily appear
to an unprejudiced reader, that I do not speak from a
spirit of anger or resentment. I know well, “the wrath
ADDRESS TO THE CLERGY. 481
of man worketh not the righteousness of God.” Much less
would I utter one word out of contempt; a spirit justly abhor
red by God and man. Neither of these can consist with that
earnest, tender love, which is the motive of my present
undertaking. In this spirit I desire to cast my bread upon
the waters; it is enough if I find it again after many days.
Meantime, you are sensible, love does not forbid, but rather
require, plainness of speech. Has it not often constrained
you, as well as me, to lay aside, not only disguise, but reserve
also; and “by manifestation of the truth to commend
ourselves to every man’s conscience in the sight of God?”
And while I endeavour to do this, let me earnestly entreat
you, for the love of God, for the love of your own soul, for
the love of the souls committed to your charge, yea, and of
the whole Church of Christ, do not bias your mind, by
thinking who it is that speaks; but impartially consider what
is spoken. And if it be false or foolish, reject it; but do not
reject “the words of truth and soberness.”
My first design was, to offer a few plain thoughts to the
Clergy of our own Church only. But upon farther reflection,
I see no cause for being so “straitened in my own bowels.”
I am a debtor to all; and therefore, though I primarily speak
to them with whom I am more immediately connected, yet I
would not be understood to exclude any, of whatsoever
denomination, whom God has called to “watch over the
souls of others, as they that must give account.”
In order to our giving this account with joy, are there not
two things which it highly imports us to consider: First,
What manner of men ought we to be? Secondly, Are we
such, or are we not?
I. And, First, if we are “overseers over the Church of
God, which he hath bought with his own blood,” what
manner of men ought we to be, in gifts as well as in grace P
1. To begin with gifts; and, (1.) With those that are
from mature. Ought not a Minister to have, First, a good
understanding, a clear apprehension, a sound judgment, and
a capacity of reasoning with some closeness? Is not this
necessary in an high degree for the work of the ministry?
Otherwise, how will he be able to understand the various
states of those under his care; or to steer them through a
thousand difficulties and dangers, to the haven where they
would be? Is it not necessary, with respect to the numerous
WOL. X. I I
482 ADDRESS TO THE CLERGY.
enemies whom he has to encounter? Can a fool cope with
all the men that know not God, and with all the spirits of
darkness? Nay, he will neither be aware of the devices of
Satan, nor the craftiness of his children.
Secondly. Is it not highly expedient that a guide of souls
should have likewise some liveliness and readiness of
thought? Or how will he be able, when need requires, to
“answer a fool according to his folly?” How frequent is
this need ! seeing we almost everywhere meet with those
empty, yet petulant creatures, who are far “wiser in their
own eyes, than seven men that can render a reason.”
Reasoning, therefore, is not the weapon to be used with them.
You cannot deal with them thus. They scorn being
convinced; nor can they be silenced, but in their own way.
Thirdly. To a sound understanding, and a lively turn of
thought, should be joined a good memory; if it may be, ready,
that you may make whatever occurs in reading or conversation
your own; but, however, retentive, lest we be “ever learning,
and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth.” On
the contrary, “every scribe instructed unto the kingdom of
heaven,” every Teacher fitted for his work, “is like an house
holder who bringeth out of his treasures things new and old.”
2. And as to acquired endowments, can he take one step
aright, without first a competent share of knowledge? a
knowledge, First, of his own office; of the high trust in
which he stands, the important work to which he is called?
Is there any hope that a man should discharge his office well,
if he knows not what it is? that he should acquit himself
faithfully of a trust, the very nature whereof he does not
understand? Nay, if he knows not the work God has given
him to do, he cannot finish it.
Secondly. No less necessary is a knowledge of the Scrip
tures, which teach us how to teach others; yea, a knowledge
of all the Scriptures; seeing scripture interprets scripture;
one part fixing the sense of another. So that, whether it be
true or not, that every good textuary is a good Divine, it is
certain none can be a good Divine who is not a good
textuary. None else can be mighty in the Scriptures; able
both to instruct and to stop the mouths of gainsayers.
In order to do this accurately, ought he not to know the
literal meaning of every word, verse, and chapter; without
which there can be no firm foundation on which the spiritual
ADDRESS TO THE CLERGY. 483
meaning can be built? Should he not likewise be able to
deduce the proper corollaries, speculative and practical, from
each text; to solve the difficulties which arise, and answer the
objections which are or may be raised against it; and to make
a suitable application of all to the consciences of his hearers?
Thirdly. But can he do this, in the most effectual manner,
without a knowledge of the original tongues? Without this,
will he not frequently be at a stand, even as to texts which
regard practice only ? But he will be under still greater
difficulties, with respect to controverted scriptures. He will
be ill able to rescue these out of the hands of any man of
learning that would pervert them: For whenever an appeal
is made to the original, his n:outh is stopped at once.
Fourthly. Is not a knowledge of profane history, likewise,
of ancient customs, of chronology and geography, though not
absolutely necessary, yet highly expedient, for him that
would throughly understand the Scriptures? since the want
even of this knowledge is but poorly supplied by reading the
comments of other men.
Fifthly. Some knowledge of the sciences also, is, to say the
least, equally expedient. Nay, may we not say, that the
knowledge of one, (whether art or science,) although now
quite unfashionable, is even necessary next, and in order to,
the knowledge of the Scripture itself? I mean logic. For
what is this, if rightly understood, but the art of good sense?
of apprehending things clearly, judging truly, and reasoning
conclusively? What is it, viewed in another light, but the
art of learning and teaching; whether by convincing or
persuading? What is there, then, in the whole compass of
science, to be desired in comparison of it?
Is not some acquaintance with what has been termed the
second part of logic, (metaphysics,) if not so necessary as this,.
yet highly expedient, (1.) In order to clear our apprehension,
(without which it is impossible either to judge correctly, or to
reason closely or conclusively,) by ranging our ideas under
general heads? And, (2.) In order to understand many
useful writers, who can very hardly be understood without it?
Should not a Minister be acquainted too with at least the
general grounds of natural philosophy? Is not this a great
help to the accurate understanding several passages of Scrip
ture? Assisted by this, he may himself comprehend, and on
proper occasions explain to others, how the invisible things of
2 I 2
484 ADDRESS TO THE CLERGY.
God are seen from the creation of the world; how “the
heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament showeth
his handiwork;” till they cry out, “O Lord, how manifold
are thy works | In wisdom hast thou made them all.”
But how far can he go in this, without some knowledge of
geometry? which is likewise useful, not barely on this
account, but to give clearness of apprehension, and an habit
of thinking closely and connectedly.
It must be allowed, indeed, that some of these branches of
knowledge are not so indispensably necessary as the rest; and
therefore no thinking man will condemn the Fathers of the
Church, for having, in all ages and nations, appointed some
to the ministry, who, suppose they had the capacity, yet had
not had the opportunity of attaining them. But what excuse
is this for one who has the opportunity, and makes no use of
it? What can be urged for a person who has had an University
education, if he does not understand them all? Certainly,
supposing him to have any capacity, to have common
understanding, he is inexcusable before God and man.
Sixthly. Can any who spend several years in those seats
of learning, be excused, if they do not add to that of the
languages and sciences, the knowledge of the Fathers? the
most authentic commentators on Scripture, as being both
nearest the fountain, and eminently endued with that Spirit
by whom all Scripture was given. It will be easily perceived,
I speak chiefly of those who wrote before the Council of
Nice. But who would not likewise desire to have some
acquaintance with those that followed them? with St.
Chrysostom, Basil, Jerome, Austin; and, above all, the man
of a broken heart, Ephraim Syrus?
Seventhly. There is yet another branch of knowledge highly
necessary for a Clergyman, and that is, knowledge of the world;
a knowledge of men, of their maxims, tempers, and manners,
such as they occur in real life. Without this he will be liable
to receive much hurt, and capable of doing little good; as he
will not know, either how to deal with men according to the
vast variety of their characters, or to preserve himself from
those who almost in every place lie in wait to deceive.
How nearly allied to this is the discernment of spirits so
far as it may be acquired by diligent observation. And can
a guide of souls be without it? If he is, is he not liable to
stumble at every step?
ADDRESS TO THE CLERGY. 485
Eighthly. Can he be without an eminent share of prudence?
that most uncommon thing which is usually called common
sense? But how shall we define it? Shall we say, with
the Schools, that it is recta ratio rerum agibilium particu
larium ?* Or is it an habitual consideration of all the
circumstances of a thing,
Quis, quid, ubi, quibus auxiliis, cur, quomodo, quando 2 +
and a facility of adapting our behaviour to the various
combinations of them? However it be defined, should it not
be studied with all care, and pursued with all earnestness of
application ? For what terrible inconveniences ensue, when
ever it is remarkably wanting !
Ninthly. Next to prudence or common sense, (if it be
not included therein,) a Clergyman ought certainly to have
some degree of good breeding; I mean address, easiness and
propriety of behaviour, wherever his lot is cast: Perhaps one
might add, he should have (though not the stateliness; for
he is “the servant of all,” yet) all the courtesy of a gentleman,
joined with the correctness of a scholar. Do we want a
pattern of this? We have one in St. Paul, even before Felix,
Festus, King Agrippa. One can scarce help thinking he
was one of the best bred men, one of the finest gentlemen in
the world. O that we likewise had the skill to “please all
men for their good unto edification l’’
In order to this, especially in our public ministrations,
would not one wish for a strong, clear, musical voice, and a
good delivery, both with regard to pronunciation and action?
I name these here, because they are far more acquirable than
has been commonly imagined. A remarkably weak and
untunable voice has by steady application become strong and
agreeable. Those who stammered almost at every word, have
learned to speak clearly and plainly. And many who were
eminently ungraceful in their pronunciation and awkward in
their gesture, have in some time, by art and labour, not only
corrected that awkwardness of action and ungracefulness of
utterance, but have become excellent in both, and in these
respects likewise the ornaments of their profession.
What may greatly encourage those who give themselves up
to the work, with regard to all these endowments, many of
* A correct conside, ation of particular things which are capable of being done.
-EDIT.
+ Who, what, where, with what helps, why, how, when.—EDIT.
486 ADDRESS TO THE CLERGY.
which cannot be attained without considerable labour, is this:
They are assured of being assisted in all their labour by Him
who teacheth man knowledge. And who teacheth like Him?
Who, like him, giveth wisdom to the simple? How easy is
it for Him, (if we desire it, and believe that he is both able
and willing to do this,) by the powerful, though secret,
influences of his Spirit, to open and enlarge our under
standing; to strengthen all our faculties; to bring to our
remembrance whatsoever things are needful, and to fix and
sharpen our attention to them; so that we may profit above
all who depend wholly on themselves, in whatever may qualify
us for our Master’s work |
3. But all these things, however great they may be in
themselves, are little in comparison of those that follow.
For what are all other gifts, whether natural or acquired,
when compared to the grace of God? And how ought this
to animate and govern the whole intention, affection, and
practice of a Minister of Christ !
(1.) As to his intention, both in undertaking this important
office, and in executing every part of it, ought it not to be
singly this, to glorify God, and to save souls from death?
Is not this absolutely and indispensably necessary, before all
and above all things? “If his eye be single, his whole body,”
his whole soul, his whole work, “will be full of light.”
“God who commanded light to shine out of darkness,” will
shine on his heart; will direct him in all his ways, will give
him to see the travail of his soul, and be satisfied. But if
his eye, his intention be not single, if there be any mixture
of meaner motives, (how much more, if those were or are his
leading motives in undertaking or exercising this high office )
his “whole body,” his whole soul, “will be full of darkness,”
even such as issues from the bottomless pit: Let not such
a man think that he shall have any blessing from the Lord.
No; the curse of God abideth on him. Let him not expect to
enjoy any settled peace, any solid comfort in his own breast;
neither can he hope there will be any fruit of his labours, any
sinners converted to God.
(2.) As to his affections. Ought not a “steward of the
mysteries of God,” a shepherd of the souls for whom Christ
died, to be endued with an eminent measure of love to God,
and love to all his brethren? a love the same in kind, but in
degree far beyond that of ordinary Christians? Can he
ADDRESS TO THE CLER GY. 487
otherwise answer the high character he bears, and the relation
wherein he stands? Without this, how can he go through all
the toils and difficulties which necessarily attend the faithful
execution of his office? Would it be possible for a parent to
go through the pain and fatigue of bearing and bringing up
even one child, were it not for that vehement affection, that
inexpressible sopy", which the Creator has given for that very
end? How much less will it be possible for any Pastor, any
spiritual parent, to go through the pain and labour of
“travailing in birth for,” and bringing up, many children to
the measure of the full stature of Christ, without a large
measure of that inexpressible affection which “a stranger
intermeddleth not with !”
He therefore must be utterly void of understanding, must
be a madman of the highest order, who, on any consideration
whatever, undertakes this office, while he is a stranger to this
affection. Nay, I have often wondered that any man in his
senses does not rather dig or thresh for a livelihood, than
continue therein, unless he feels at least (which is extremá
lined amare+) such an earnest concern for the glory of God,
and such a thirst after the salvation of souls, that he is ready
to do anything, to lose anything, or to suffer anything, rather
than one should perish for whom Christ died.
And is not even this degree of love to God and man utterly
inconsistent with the love of the world; with the love of
money or praise; with the very lowest degree of either
ambition or sensuality? How much less can it consist with
that poor, low, irrational, childish principle, the love of
diversions? (Surely, even a man, were he neither a Minister
nor a Christian, should “put away childish things.”) Not
only this, but the love of pleasure, and what lies still deeper
in the soul, the love of ease, flees before it.
(3.) As to his practice: “Unto the ungodly, saith God,
Why dost thou preach my laws?” What is a Minister of
Christ, a shepherd of souls, unless he is all devoted to God?
unless he abstain, with the utmost care and diligence, from
every evil word and work; from all appearance of evil; yea,
from the most innocent things, whereby any might be offended
or made weak? Is he not called, above others, to be an
example to the flock, in his private as well as public character?
* This quotation from Terence is thus translated by Colman :
“Love in its last degree.”—EDIT.
488 ADDRESS TO THE CLERGY.
an example of all holy and heavenly tempers, filling the heart
so as to shine through the life? Consequently, is not his
whole life, if he walks worthy of his calling, one incessant
labour of love; one continued tract of praising God, and
helping man; one series of thankfulness and beneficence? Is he
not always humble, always serious, though rejoicing evermore;
mild, gentle, patient, abstinent? May you not resemble him
to a guardian angel, ministering to those “who shall be hears
of salvation?” Is he not one sent forth from God, to stand
between God and man, to guard and assist the poor, helpless
children of men, to supply them both with light and strength,
to guide them through a thousand known and unknown dan
gers, till at the appointed time he returns, with those committed
to his charge, to his and their Father who is in heaven?
O who is able to describe such a messenger of God, faith
fully executing his high office ! working together with God,
with the great Author both of the old and of the new creation |
See his Lord, the eternal Son of God, going forth on that
work of omnipotence, and creating heaven and earth by the
breath of his mouth ! See the servant whom he delighteth to
honour, fulfilling the counsel of his will, and in his name
speaking the word whereby is raised a new spiritual creation.
Empowered by him, he says to the dark, unformed void of
nature, “Let there be light;” “ and there is light. Old
things are passed away; behold, all things are become new.”
He is continually employed, in what the angels of God have
not the honour to do,-co-operating with the Redeemer of
men in “bringing many children to glory.”
Such is a true Minister of Christ; and such, beyond all
possibility of dispute, ought both you and I to be.
II. But are we such 7 What are we in the respects above
named ? It is a melancholy but necessary consideration.
It is true, many have wrote upon this subject; and some of
them admirably well: Yet few, if any, at least in our nation,
have carried their inquiry through all these particulars.
Neither have they always spoken su plain and home as the
nature of the thing required. But why did they not? Was
it because they were unwilling to give pain to those whom
they loved? Or were they hindered by fear of disobliging,
or of incurring any temporal inconvenience? Miserable
fear ! Is any temporal inconvenience whatever to be laid in
the balance with the souls of our brethren? Or were they
ADDRESS TO THE CLERGY. 489
prevented by shame, arising from a consciousness of their
own many and great defects? Undoubtedly this might
extenuate the fault, but not altogether remove it. For is it
not a wise advice, “Be not ashamed when it concerneth thy
soul?” especially when it concerns the souls of thousands
also? In such a case may God
Set as a flint our steady face,
Harden to adamant our brow !
But is there not another hinderance? Should not compas
sion, should not tenderness, hinder us from giving pain?
Yes, from giving unnecessary pain. But what manner of
tenderness is this? It is like that of a surgeon who lets his
patient be lost because he is too compassionate to probe his
wounds. Cruel compassion | Let me give pain, so I may
save life. Let me probe, that God may heal.
1. Are we then such as we are sensible we should be,
First, with regard to natural endowments? I am afraid not.
If we were, how many stumbling-blosks would be removed
out of the way of serious Infidels? Alas, what terrible
effects do we continually see of that common though sense
less imagination, “The boy, if he is fit for nothing else, will
do well enough for a Parson 1” Hence it is, that we see (I
would to God there were no such instance in all Great Britain,
or Ireland 1) dull, heavy, blockish Ministers; men of no life,
no spirit, no readiness of thought; who are consequently the
jest of every pert fool, every lively, airy coxcomb they meet.
We see others whose memory can retain nothing; therefore
they can never be men of considerable knowledge; they can
never know much even of those things which they are most
nearly concerned to know. Alas, they are pouring the water
into a leaky vessel; and the broken cistern can hold no
water ! I do not say, with Plato, that “all human know
ledge is nothing but remembering.” Yet certain it is, that,
without remembering, we can have but a small share of
knowledge. And even those who enjoy the most retentive
memory, find great reason still to complain,
Skill comes so slow, and life so fast does fly;
We learn so little, and forget so much !
And yet we see and bewail a still greater defect in some
that are in the ministry. They want sense, they are defective
in understanding, their capacity is low and shallow, their
apprehension is muddy and confused; of consequence, they
490 ADDRESS TO THE CLERGY.
are utterly incapable either of forming a true judgment of
things, or of reasoning justly upon anything. O how can
these who themselves know nothing aright, impart knowledge
to others? how instruct them in all the variety of duty, to
God, their neighbour, and themselves? How will they
guide them through all the mazes of error, through all the
intanglements of sin and temptation? How will they
apprize them of the devices of Satan, and guard them against
all the wisdom of the world?
It is easy to perceive, I do not speak this for their sake;
(for they are incorrigible;) but for the sake of parents, that
they may open their eyes and see, a blockhead can never
“do well enough for a Parson.” He may do well enough
for a tradesman; so well as to gain fifty or an hundred
thousand pounds. He may do well enough for a soldier;
nay, (if you pay well for it,) for a very well-dressed and well
mounted officer. He may do well enough for a sailor, and
may shine on the quarter-deck of a man-of-war. He may
do so well, in the capacity of a lawyer or physician, as to ride
in his gilt chariot. But O ! think not of his being a
Minister, unless you would bring a blot upon your family, a
scandal upon our Church, and a reproach on the gospel,
which he may murder, but cannot teach.
Are we such as we are sensible we should be, Secondly, with
regard to acquired endowments? Here the matter (suppose
we have common understanding) lies more directly within our
own power. But under this, as well as the following heads,
methinks I would not consider at all, how many or how few
are either excellent or defective. I would only desire every
person who reads this to apply it to himself. Certainly some
one in the nation is defective. Am not I the man?
Let us each seriously examine himself. Have I, (1.) Such
a knowledge of Scripture, as becomes him who undertakes so
to explain it to others, that it may be a light in all their
paths? Have I a full and clear view of the analogy of faith,
which is the clue to guide me through the whole? Am I
acquainted with the several parts of Scripture; with all parts
of the Old Testament and the New Upon the mention of
any text, do I know the context, and the parallel places?
Have I that point at least of a good Divine, the being a good
textuary? Do I know the grammatical construction of the
four Gospels; of the Acts; of the Epistles; and am I a
ADDRESS TO THE CLERGY. 491
master of the spiritual sense (as well as the literal) of what I
read? Do I understand the scope of each book, and how
every part of it tends thereto? Have I skill to draw the
natural inferences deducible from each text? Do I know
the objections raised to them or from them by Jews, Deists,
Papists, Arians, Socinians, and all other sectaries, who more
or less corrupt or cauponize the word of God? Am I ready
to give a satisfactory answer to each of these objections?
And have I learned to apply every part of the sacred
writings, as the various states of my hearers require?
(2.) Do I understand Greek and Hebrew Otherwise, how
can I undertake, (as every Minister does,) not only to explain
books which are written therein, but to defend them against
all opponents? Am I not at the mercy of every one who
does understand, or even pretends to understand, the original?
For which way can I confute his pretence? Do I under
stand the language of the Old Testament? critically? at all?
Can I read into English one of David's Psalms; or even the
first chapter of Genesis? Do I understand the language of
the New Testament ? Am I a critical master of it? Have
I enough of it even to read into English the first chapter of
St. Luke 2 If not, how many years did I spend at school?
How many at the University? And what was I doing all
those years? Ought not shame to cover my face?
(3) Do I understand my own office? Have I deeply
considered before God the character which I bear? What is
it to be an Ambassador of Christ, an Envoy from the King
of heaven? And do I know and feel what is implied in
“watching over the souls” of men “as he that must give
account ?”
(4) Do I understand so much of profane history as tends
to confirm and illustrate the sacred? Am I acquainted with
the ancient customs of the Jews and other nations mentioned
in Scripture? Have I a competent knowledge of chrono
logy, that at least which refers to the sacred writings? And
am I so far (if no farther) skilled in geography, as to know
the situation, and give some account, of all the considerable
places mentioned therein 7
(5.) Am I a tolerable master of the sciences? Have I gone
through the very gate of them, logic? If not, I am not likely
to go much farther, when I stumble at the threshold. Do I
understand it so as to be ever the better for it? to have it
492 ADDRESS TO THE CLERGY.
always ready for use; so as to apply every rule of it, when
occasion is, almost as naturally as I turn my hand? Do I
understand it at all? Are not even the moods and figures
above my comprehension? Do not I poorly endeavour to
cover my ignorance, by affecting to laugh at their barbarous
names P Can I even reduce an indirect mood to a direct;
an hypothetic to a categorical syllogism ? Rather, have not
my stupid indolence and laziness made me very ready to
believe, what the little wits and pretty gentlemen affirm, “that
logic is good for nothing?” It is good for this at least,
(wherever it is understood,) to make people talk less; by
showing them both what is, and what is not, to the point;
and how extremely hard it is to prove anything. Do I under
stand metaphysics; if not the depths of the Schoolmen, the
subtleties of Scotus or Aquinas, yet the first rudiments, the
general principles, of that useful science? Have I conquered
so much of it, as to clear my apprehension and range my
ideas under proper heads; so much as enables me to read
with ease and pleasure, as well as profit, Dr. Henry More's
Works, Malebranche’s “Search after Truth,” and Dr. Clarke's
“Demonstration of the Being and Attributes of God?” Do
I understand natural philosophy? If I have not gone deep
therein, have I digested the general grounds of it? Have I
mastered Gravesande, Keill, Sir Isaac Newton’s Principia,
with his “Theory of Light and Colours?” In order thereto,
have I laid in some stock of mathematical knowledge? Am
I master of the mathematical A B C of Euclid's Elements?
If I have not gone thus far, if I am such a novice still, what
have I been about ever since I came from school?
(6.) Am I acquainted with the Fathers; at least with those
venerable men who lived in the earliest ages of the Church?
Have I read over and over the golden remains of Clemens
Romanus, of Ignatius and Polycarp; and have I given one
reading, at least, to the works of Justin Martyr, Tertullian,
Origen, Clemens Alexandrinus, and Cyprian 2
(7.) Have I any knowledge of the world? Have I studied
men, (as well as books,) and observed their tempers, maxims,
and manners? Have I learned to beware of men; to add
the wisdom of the serpent to the innocence of the dove?
Has God given me by nature, or have I acquired, any measure
of the discernment of spirits; or of its near ally, prudence,
enabling me on all occasions to consider all circumstances, and
ADDRESS TO THE CLERGY. 493
to suit and vary my behaviour according to the various
combinations of them? Do I labour never to be rude or ill
mannered; not to be remarkably wanting in good-breeding?
Do I endeavour to copy after those who are eminent for
address and easiness of behaviour? Am I (though never
light or trifling, either in word or action, yet) affable and
courteous to all men? And do I omit no means which is in
my power, and consistent with my character, of “pleasing all
men” with whom I converse, “for their good to edification?”
If I am wanting even in these lowest endowments, shall I
not frequently regret the want? How often shall I move
heavily, and be far less useful than I might have been How
much more shall I suffer in my usefulness, if I have wasted
the opportunities I once had of acquainting myself with the
great lights of antiquity, the Ante-Nicene Fathers; or if I
have droned away those precious hours wherein I might have
made myself master of the sciences ! How poorly must I
many times drag on, for want of the helps which I have
vilely cast away! But is not my case still worse, if I have
loitered away the time wherein I should have perfected myself
in Greek and Hebrew 7 I might before this have been
critically acquainted with these treasuries of sacred knowledge.
But they are now hid from my eyes; they are close locked up,
and I have no key to open them. However, have I used all
possible diligence to supply that grievous defect, (so far as it
can be supplied now,) by the most accurate knowledge of
the English Scriptures? Do I meditate therein day and
night? Do I think (and consequently speak) thereof, “when
I sit in the house, and when I walk by the way; when I lie
down, and when I rise up?” By this means have I at length
attained a thorough knowledge, as of the sacred text, so of its
literal and spiritual meaning? Otherwise, how can I attempt
to instruct others therein? Without this, I am a blind guide
indeed! I am absolutely incapable of teaching my flock
what I have never learned myself; no more fit to lead souls
to God, than I am to govern the world.
2. And yet there is a higher consideration than that of
gifts; higher than any or all of these joined together; a
consideration in view of which all external and all intellectual
endowments vanish into nothing. Am I such as I ought to
be, with regard to the grace of God? The Lord God enable
me to judge aright of this !
494 ADDRESS TO THE CLERGY.
And, (1) What was my intention in taking upon me this
office and ministry? What was it, in taking charge of this
parish, either as Minister or Curate? Was it always, and is
it now, wholly and solely to glorify God, and save souls?
Has my eye been singly fixed on this, from the beginning
hitherto? Had I never, have I not now, any mixture in my
intention; any alloy of baser metal? Had I, or have I, no
thought of worldly gain; “filthy lucre,” as the Apostle terms
it? Had I at first, have I now, no secular view no eye to
honour or preferment? to a plentiful income; or, at least, a
competency? a warm and comfortable livelihood?
Alas! my brother! “If the light that is in thee be dark
mess, how great is that darkness !” Was a comfortable
livelihood, then, your motive for entering into the ministry?
And do you avow this in the face of the sun, and without one
blush upon your cheek? I cannot compare you with Simon
Magus; you are many degrees beneath him. He offered to
give money for the gift of God, the power of conferring the
Holy Ghost. Hereby, however, he showed that he set an
higher value on the gift, than on the money which he would
have parted with for it. But you do not; you set a far higher
value on the money than on the gift; insomuch that you do
not desire, you will not accept of, the gift, unless the money
accompany it ! The Bishop said, when you was ordained,
“Receive thou the Holy Ghost.” But that was the least of
your care. Let who will receive this, so you receive the
money, the revenue of a good benefice. While you minister
the word and sacraments before God, he gives the Holy
Ghost to those who duly receive them: So that, “through
your hands,” likewise, “the Holy Ghost is,” in this sense,
“given” now. But you have little concern whether he be
or not; so little, that you will minister no longer, he shall be
given no more, either through your lips or hands, if you have
no more money for your labour. O Simon, Simon what a
saint wert thou, compared to many of the most honourable
men now in Christendom |
Let not any either ignorantly or wilfully mistake me. I
would not “muzzle the ox that treadeth out the corn.” I
know the spiritual “labourer,” too, “is worthy of his
reward;” and that, if “we sow unto” our flock “spiritual
things,” it is meet that we “reap of their carnal things.” I
do not therefore blame, no, not in any degree, a Minister's
ADDRESS TO THE CLERGY. 495
taking a yearly salary; but I blame his seeking it. The thing
blamable is the having it in his view, as the motive, or any
part of the motive, for entering into this sacred office.
Hic nigra succus loliginis, hac est
AErugomera."
If preferment, or honour, or profit was in his eye, his eye was
not single. And our Lord knew no medium between a
single and an evil eye. The eye, therefore, which is not
single is evil. It is a plain, adjudged case. He then that
has any other design in undertaking or executing the office
of a Minister than purely this, to glorify God and save souls,
his eye is not single. Of consequence, it is evil; and there
fore his “whole body” must be “full of darkness.” “The
light which is in” him “is” very “darkness;” darkness
covers his whole soul; he has no solid peace; he has no
blessing from God; and there is no fruit of his labours.
It is no wonder that they who see no harm in this, see
no harm in adding one living to another, and, if they can,
another to that; yet still wiping their mouth, and saying,
they have done no evil. In the very first step, their eye was
not single; therefore their mind was filled with darkness.
So they stumble on still in the same mire, till their feet
“stumble on the dark mountains.”
It is pleaded, indeed, that “a small living will not main
tain a large family.” Maintain / How 2 It will not clothe.
them “in purple and fine linen;” nor enable them to fare
“sumptuously every day:” But will not the living you have
now afford you and yours the plain necessaries, yea, and
conveniencies, of life? Will it not maintain you in the
frugal, Christian simplicity which becomes a Minister of
Christ? It will not maintain you in pomp and grandeur, in
elegant luxury, in fashionable sensuality. So much the
better. If your eyes were open, whatever your income was,
you would flee from these as from hell-fire.
It has been pleaded, Secondly, “By having a larger
income, I am able to do more good.” But dare you aver, in
the presence of God, that it was singly with this view, only
for this end, that you sought a larger income 2 If not, you
are still condemned before God; your eye was not single.
* This quotation from Horace is thus translated by Boscawen :
“This is fell poison's blackest juice.”-EDIT.
496 ADDRESS TO THE CLERGY.
Do not therefore quibble and evade. This was not your
motive of acting. It was not the desire of doing more good,
whether to the souls or bodies of men; it was not the love of
God: (You know it was not; your own conscience is as a
thousand witnesses.) But it was “the love of money,” and
“the desire of other things,” which animated you in this
pursuit. If, then, the word of God is true, you are in
darkness still: It fills and covers your soul.
I might add, a larger income does not necessarily imply
a capacity of doing more spiritual good. And this is the
highest kind of good. It is good to feed the hungry, to
clothe the naked: But it is a far nobler good to “save
souls from death,” to “pluck” poor “brands out of the
burning.” And it is that to which you are peculiarly called,
and to which you have solemnly promised to “bend all your
studies and endeavours.” But you are by no means sure,
that, by adding a second living to your first, you shall be
more capable of doing good in this kind, than you would
have been had you laid out all your time, and all your
strength, on your first flock.
“However, I shall be able to do more temporal good.”
You are not sure even of this. “If riches increase, they are
increased that eat them.” Perhaps your expenses may rise
proportionably with your income. But if not, if you have a
greater ability, shall you have a greater willingness, to do
good? You have no reason in the world to believe this.
There are a thousand instances of the contrary. How many
have less will when they have more power ! Now they have
more money, they love it more; when they had little, they
did their “diligence gladly to give of that little; ” but
since they have had much, they are so far from “giving
plenteously,” that they can hardly afford to give at all.
“But by my having another living, I maintain a valuable
man, who might otherwise want the necessaries of life.” I
answer, (1.) Was this your whole and sole motive in seeking
that other living? If not, this plea will not clear you from
the charge; your eye was not single. (2.) If it was, you may
put it beyond dispute; you may prove at once the purity of
your intention:—Make that valuable man Rector of one of
your parishes, and you are clear before God and man.
But what can be pleaded for those who have two or more
flocks, and take care of none of them? who just look at them
ADDRESS TO THE CLERGY. 497
now and then for a few days, and then remove to a convenient
distance, and say, “Soul, thou hast much goods laid up for
many years; take thine ease; eat, drink, and be merry?”
Some years ago I was asking a plain man, “Ought not
he who feeds the flock, to eat of the milk of the flock?”
He answered: “Friend, I have no objection to that. But
what is that to him who does not feed the flock? He
stands on the far side of the hedge, and feeds himself. It is
another who feeds the flock; and ought he to have the milk
of the flock? What canst thou say for him?” Truly,
nothing at all; and he will have nothing to say for himself,
when the great Shepherd shall pronounce that just sentence,
“Bind” the unprofitable servant “hand and foot, and cast
him into outer darkness.”
I have dwelt the longer on this head, because a right
intention is the first point of all, and the most necessary of
all; inasmuch as the want of this cannot be supplied by
anything else whatsoever. It is the setting out wrong; a
fault never to be amended, unless you return to the place
whence you came, and set out right. It is impossible there
fore to lay too great stress upon a single eye, a pure intention;
without which, all our sacrifice, our prayers, sermons, and
sacraments, are an abomination to the Lord.
I cannot dismiss this important article, without touching
upon one thing more. How many are directly concerned
therein, I leave to the Searcher of hearts.
You have been settled in a living or a curacy for some
time. You are now going to exchange it for another. Why
do you do this? For what reason do you prefer this before
your former living or curacy? “Why, I had but fifty
pounds a year where I was before, and now I shall have a
hundred.” And is this your real motive of acting? the true
reason why you make the exchange? “It is: And is it not
a sufficient reason?” Yes, for a Heathen ; but not for one
who calls himself a Christian.
Perhaps a more gross infatuation than this was never yet
known upon earth. There goes one who is commissioned to
be an ambassador of Christ, a shepherd of never-dying souls,
a watchman over the Israel of God, a steward of the mysteries
which “angels desire to look into.” Where is he going?
“To London, to Bristol, to Northampton.” Why does he
go thither? “To get more money.” A tolerable reason for
VOL. X. K. K.
498 ADDRESS TO THE CLERGY,
driving a herd of bullocks to one market rather than the
bther; though if a drover does this without any farther view,
he acts as a Heathen, not a Christian. But what a reason
for leaving the immortal souls over whom the Holy Ghost
had made you overseer ! And yet this is the motive which
not only influences in secret, but is acknowledged openly and
without a blush ! Nay, it is excused, justified, defended;
and that not by a few, here and there, who are apparently
void both of piety and shame; but by numbers of seemingly
religious men, from one end of England to the other !
(2.) Am I, Secondly, such as I ought to be, with regard
to my affections? I am taken from among, and ordained
for, men, in things pertaining to God. I stand between
God and man, by the authority of the great Mediator, in the
nearest and most endearing relation both to my Creator
and to my fellow-creatures. Have I accordingly given my
heart to God, and to my brethren for his sake? Do I love
God with all my soul and strength? and my neighbour,
every man, as myself? Does this love swallow me up, possess
me whole, constitute my supreme happiness? Does it
animate all my passions and tempers, and regulate all my
powers and faculties? Is it the spring which gives rise to
all my thoughts, and governs all my words and actions? If
it does, not unto me, but unto God be the praise ! If it does
not, “God be merciful to me a sinner !”
At least, do I feel such a concern for the glory of God,
and such a thirst after the salvation of men, that I am ready
to do any thing, however contrary to my natural inclination,
to part with anything, however agreeable to me, to suffer
anything, however grievous to flesh and blood, so I may save
one soul from hell? Is this my ruling temper at all times
and in all places? Does it make all my labour light? If
not, what a weariness is it! what a drudgery ! Had I not
far better hold the plough?
But is it possible this should be my ruling temper, if I still
love the world? No, certainly, if I “love the world, the love
of the Father is not in” me. The love of God is not in me,
if I love money, if I love pleasure, so called, or diversion.
Neither is it in me, if I am a lover of honour or praise, or of
dress, or of good eating and drinking. Nay, even indolence,
or the love of ease, is inconsistent with the love of God.
What a creature then is a covetous, an ambitious, a
ADDRESS TO THE CLERGY. 499
'luxurious, an indolent, a diversion-loving Clergyman | Is it
any wonder that infidelity should increase, where any of
these are to be found? that many, comparing their spirit
with their profession, should blaspheme that worthy name
whereby they are called? But “woe be unto him by whom
the offence cometh ! It were good for that man if he had
never been born.” It were good for him now, rather than
he should continue to turn the lame out of the way, “that a
millstone were hanged about his neck, and he were cast into
the depth of the sea!”
(3.) May not you who are of a better spirit consider,
Thirdly, Am I such as I ought to be with regard to my
practice? Am I, in my private life, wholly devoted to God?
Am I intent upon this one thing,-to do in every point
“not my own will, but the will of Him that sent me?”
Do I carefully and resolutely abstain from every evil word
and work? “from all appearance of evil?” from all indifferent
things, which might lay a stumbling-block in the way of the
weak? Am I zealous of good works? As I have time, do I
do good to all men? and that in every kind, and in as high
a degree as I am capable?
How do I behave in the public work whereunto I am
called,—in my pastoral character? Am I “a pattern” to
my “flock, in word, in behaviour, in love, in spirit, in faith,
in purity?” Is my “word,” my daily conversation, “always
in grace,” always “meet to minister grace to the hearers?”
Is my behaviour suitable to the dignity of my calling?
Do I walk as Christ also walked ? Does the love of God
and man not only fill my heart, but shine through my whole
conversation? Is the spirit, the temper which appears in all
my words and actions, such as allows me to say with humble
boldness, Herein “be ye followers of me, as I am of Christ?”
Do all who have spiritual discernment take knowledge (judging
of the tree by its fruits) that “the life which I now live, I live
by faith in the Son of God;” and that in all “simplicity and
godly sincerity I have my conversation in the world?” Am I
exemplarily pure from all worldly desire, from all vile and
vain affectious? Is my life one continued labour of love, one
tract of praising God and helping man? Do I in everything
see “Him who is invisible?” And “beholding with open
face the glory of the Lord,” am I “changed into the same
image from glory to glory, by the Spirit of the Lord?”
2 K. 2
500 ADDRESS TO THE CLERGY.
Brethren, is not this our calling, even as we are Christians;
but more eminently as we are Ministers of Christ? And
why (I will not say, do we fall short, but why) are we satisfied
with falling so short of it? Is there any necessity laid upon
us, of sinking so infinitely below our calling? Who hath
required this at our hands? Certainly, not He by whose
authority we minister. Is not his will the same with regard
to us, as with regard to his first Ambassadors? Is not his
love, and is not his power, still the same, as they were in the
ancient days? Know we not, that Jesus Christ “is the same
yesterday, to-day, and for ever?” Why then may not you
be as “burning and as shining lights,” as those that shone
seventeen hundred years ago? Do you desire to partake of
the same burning love, of the same shining holiness? Surely
you do. You cannot but be sensible it is the greatest blessing
which can be bestowed on any child of man. Do you design
it; aim at it; “press on to” this “mark of the prize of the
high calling of God in Christ Jesus?” Do you constantly
and earnestly pray for it? Then, as the Lord liveth, ye
shall attain. Only let us pray on, and “tarry at Jerusalem,
till we be endued with power from on high.” Let us
continue in all the ordinances of God, particularly in medi
tating on his word, “in denying ourselves, and taking up
our cross daily,” and, “as we have time, doing good to all
men; ” and then assuredly “the great Shepherd” of us and
our flocks will “make us perfect in every good work to do
his will, and work in us all that is well pleasing in his
sight!” This is the desire and prayer of
Your Brother and Servant,
in our common Lord,
JOHN WESLEY.
LoNDoN, February 6, 1756.
A LETTER
To
THE REV. M.R. TOOGOOD, OF EXETER;
OCCASIONED BY HIS “DISSENT FROM THE CHURCH OF
ENGLAND FULLY Just 1F1ED.”
S1R,
If you fairly represent Mr. White s arguments, they
are liable to much exception. But whether they are or no,
your answers to them are far from unexceptionable. To the
manner of the whole I object, you are not serious; you do
not write as did those excellent men, Mr. Baxter, Mr. Howe,
Dr. Calamy, who seem always to speak, not laughing, but
weeping. To the matter I object, that if your argument
hold, as it is proposed in your very title-page; if “a dissent
from our Church be the genuine consequence of the allegi
ance due to Christ;” then all who do not dissent have
renounced that allegiance, and are in a state of damnation |
I have not leisure to consider all that you advance in proof
of this severe sentence. I can only at present examine your
main argument, which indeed contains the strength of your
cause: “My separation from the Church of England,” you
say, “is a debt I owe to God, and an act of allegiance due to
Christ, the only Lawgiver in the Church.” (Page 2.)
Again: “The controversy turns upon one single point,
Has the Church power to decree rites and ceremonies? If
it has this power, then all the objections of the Dissenters,
about kneeling at the Lord’s supper, and the like, are
impertinent: If it has no power at all of this kind, yea, if
Christ, the great Lawgiver and King of the Church, hath
expressly commanded, that no power of this kind shall ever
be claimed or ever be yielded by any of his followers; then
the Dissenters will have honour before God for protesting
against such usurpation.” (Page 3.)
502 LETTER. To
I join issue on this single point: “If Christ hath expressly
commanded, that no power of this kind shall ever be claimed,
or ever yielded, by any of his followers;” then are all who
yield it, all Churchmen, in a state of damnation, as much as
those who “deny the Lord that bought them.” But if
Christ hath not expressly commanded this, we may go to
church, and yet not go to hell.
To the point then: The power I speak of is a power of
decreeing rites and ceremonies, of appointing such circum
stantials (suppose) of public worship as are in themselves
purely indifferent, being no way determined in Scripture.
And the question is, “Hath Christ expressly commanded,
that this power shall never be claimed, nor ever yielded, by any
of his followers?” This I deny. How do you prove it?
Why, thus: “If the Church of England has this power,
so has the Church of Rome.” (Page 4.) Allowed. But
this is not to the purpose. I want “the express command
of Christ.”
You say, “Secondly, The persons who have this power in
England, are not the Clergy, but the Parliament.” (Pages 8,
9.) Perhaps so. But this also strikes wide. Where is
“the express command of Christ?”
You ask, “Thirdly, How came the civil Magistrate by this
power?” (Page 11.) “Christ commands us to ‘call no man
upon earth father and master;’ that is, to acknowledge no
authority of any in matters of religion.” (Page 12.) At
length we are come to the express command, which, according
to your interpretation, is express enough ; “that is, Acknow
ledge no authority of any in matters of religion;” own no
power in any to appoint any circumstance of public worship,
anything pertaining to decency and order. But this inter
pretation is not allowed. It is the very point in question.
We allow, Christ does here expressly command, to acknow
ledge no such authority of any, as the Jews paid their Rabbies,
whom they usually styled either Fathers or Masters; implicitly
believing all they affirmed, and obeying all they enjoined.
But we deny, that he expressly commands, to acknowledge
no authority of governors, in things purely indifferent,
whether they relate to the worship of God, or other matters.
You attempt to prove it by the following words: “‘One is
your Master’ and Lawgiver, “even Christ; and all ye are
brethren;’ (Matt. xxiii. 8, 9;) all Christians; having no
THE REV. MR, TOOGOOD. 503
dominion over one another.” True; no such dominion as
their Rabbies claimed; but in all things indifferent, Christian
Magistrates have dominion. As to your inserting, “ and
Lawgiver,” in the preceding clause, you have no authority
from the text; for it is not plain, that our Lord is here
speaking of himself in that capacity. A 3xxx xxos, the word
here rendered “Master,” you well know, conveys no such
idea. It should rather have been translated “Teacher.”
And indeed the whole text primarily relates to doctrines.
But you cite another text: “The Princes of the Gen
tiles exercise dominion over them; but it shall not be so
among you.” (Matt. xx. 25.) Very good; that is, Christian
Pastors shall not exercise such dominion over their flock, as
heathen Princes do over their subjects. Most sure; but,
without any violation of this, they may appoint how things
shall “be done decently and in order.”
“But Christ is the sole Lawgiver, Judge, and Sovereign in
his Church.” (Page 12.) He is the sole sovereign Judge
and Lawgiver. But it does not follow (what you continually
infer) that there are no subordinate judges therein; nor, that
there are none who have power to make regulations therein
in subordination to Him. King George is sovereign judge
and lawgiver in these realms. But are there no subordinate
judges? Nay, are there not many who have power to make
rules or laws in their own little communities? And how
does this “invade his authority and throne?” Not at all,
unless they contradict the laws of his kingdom.
“However, he alone has authority to fix the terms of
communion for his followers, or Church.” (Ibid.) “And
the terms he has fixed, no men on earth have authority to set
aside or alter.” This I allow, (although it is another question,)
none has authority to exclude from the Church of Christ those
who comply with the terms which Christ has fixed. But
not to admit into the society called the Church of England,
or, not to administer the Lord's supper to them, is not the
same thing with “excluding men from the Church of Christ;”
unless this society be the whole Church of Christ, which
neither you nor I will affirm. This society therefore may
scruple to receive those as members, who do not observe her
rules in things indifferent, without pretending “to set aside
or alter the terms which Christ has fixed” for admission into
the Christian Church; and yet without “lording it over God’s
504 LETTER. To
heritage, or usurping Christ's throne.” Nor does all “the
allegiance we owe Him” at all hinder our “obeying them
that have the rule over us,” in things of a purely indifferent
nature. Rather, our allegiance to Him requires our obedience
to them. In being “their servants,” thus far we are
“Christ's servants.” We obey his general command, by
obeying our governors in particular instances.
Hitherto you have produced no express command of
Christ to the contrary. Nor do you attempt to show any
such, but strike off from the question for the twelve or
fourteen pages following. But after these you say, “The
subjects of Christ are expressly commanded to receive nothing
as parts of religion, which are only ‘commandments of men.”
(Matt. xv. 9.)” (Page 26.) We grant it; but this is no
command at all, not to “obey those who have the rule over
us.” And we must obey them in things indifferent, or not
at all. For in things which God hath forbidden, should such
be enjoined, we dare not obey. Nor need they enjoin what
God hath commanded.
Upon the whole, we agree that Christ is the only “supreme
Judge and Lawgiver in the Church;” I may add, and in the
world; for “there is no power,” no secular power, “but of
God;” of God who “was manifested in the flesh, who is
over all, blessed for ever.” But we do not at all agree in
the inference which you would draw therefrom, namely,
that there is no subordinate judge or lawgiver in the Church.
You may just as well infer, that there is no subordinate judge
or lawgiver in the world. Yea, there is, both in the one and
the other. And in obeying these subordinate powers, we
do not, as you aver, renounce the Supreme; no, but we obey
them for his sake.
We believe, it is not only innocent, but our bounden duty,
so to do; in all things of an indifferent nature to submit our
selves “to every ordinance of man;” and that “for the Lord's
sake;” because we think he has not forbidden but expressly
commanded it. Therefore, “as a genuine fruit of our allegi
ance to Christ,” we submit both to the King and governors
sent by him, so far as possibly we can, without breaking some
plain command of God. And you have not yet brought any
plain command to justify that assertion, that “we may not
submit either to the King, or to governors sent by him, in
any circumstance relating to the worship of God.”
THE REV. M.R. TOOGOOD. 505
Here is a plain declaration, “There is no power but of God;
the powers that exist are ordained of God. Whosoever,
therefore, resisteth the power,” (without an absolute necessity,
which in things indifferent there is not,) “resisteth the
ordinance of God.” And here is a plain command grounded
thereon: “Let every soul be subject to the higher powers.”
Now, by what scripture does it appear, that we are not to be
subject in any thing pertaining to the worship of God?
This is an exception which we cannot possibly allow, without
clear warrant from holy writ. And we apprehend, those of
the Church of Rome alone can decently plead for such an
exception. It does not sound well in the mouth of a
Protestant, to claim an exemption from the jurisdiction of
the civil powers in all matters of religion, and in the minutest
circumstance relating to the Church.
Another plain command is that mentioned but now :
“Submit yourselves to every ordinance of man for the
Lord’s sake.” And this we shall think ourselves hereby
fully authorized to do, in things of a, religious, as well as a
civil, nature, till you can produce plain, explicit proof from
Scripture, that we must submit in the latter, but not in the
former. We cannot find any such distinction in the Bible;
and till we find it there, we cannot receive it, but must
believe our allegiance to Christ requires submission to our
governors in all things indifferent.
This I speak, even on supposition that the things in
question were enjoined merely by the King and Parliament.
If they were, what then? Then I would submit to them
“for the Lord’s sake.” So that in all your parade, either
with regard to King George or Queen Anne, there may be
wit, but no wisdom; no force, no argument, till you can
support this distinction from plain testimony of Scripture.
Till this is done, it can never be proved that “a dissent
from the Church of England” (whether it can be justified
from other topics or no) “is the genuine and just consequence
of the allegiance which is due to Christ, as the only Law
giver in the Church.” As you proposed to “bring the
controversy to this short and plain issue, to let it turn on
this single point,” I have done so; I have spoken to this
alone; although I could have said something on many other
points which you have advanced as points of the utmost
certainty, although they are far more easily affirmed than
506 THOUGHTS CONCERNING
proved. But I wave them for the present; hoping this may
suffice to show any fair and candid inquirer, that it is very
possible to be united to Christ and to the Church of England
at the same time; that we need not separate from the
Church, in order to preserve our allegiance to Christ; but
may be firm members thereof, and yet “have a conscience
void of offence toward God and toward man.”
I am, Sir,
Your very humble servant,
JOHN WESLEY.
BRISTOL,
January 10, 1758.
SERIOUS THOUGHTS
CONCERNING
GOD FATHERS AND GOD MOTHERS.
1. IN the ancient Church, when baptism was administered,
there were usually two or more sponsors (so Tertullian calls
them, an hundred years after the death of St. John) for every
person to be baptized. As these were witnesses, before God
and the Church, of the solemn engagement those persons
then entered into, so they undertook (as the very word
implies) to watch over those souls in a peculiar manner, to
instruct, admonish, exhort, and build them up in the faith
once delivered to the saints. These were considered as a
kind of spiritual parents to the baptized, whether they were
infants or at man’s estate; and were expected to supply
whatever spiritual helps were wanting either through the
death or neglect of the natural parents.
2. These have been retained in the Christian Church from
the earliest times, as the reason for them was the same in all
ages. In our Church they are termed, by a proper and
GODFATHERS AND GODMOTHERS. 507
expressive name, godfathers and godmothers. And it is
appointed, “that there shall be for every male child to be
baptized, two godfathers and one godmother; and for every
female, one godfather and two godmothers.”
3. But it is objected against these, (1.) That there is no
mention of godfathers and godmothers in Scripture. (2.)
That many undertake this without ever considering what they
undertake, or once seriously thinking how to perform it.
And, (3.) That no serious man would undertake it, because it
is impossible to perform it.
4. I answer, First, it is undoubtedly true, godfathers and
godmothers are not mentioned in Scripture; and therefore it
cannot be said they are absolutely necessary, or that baptism
cannot be administered without them. But yet it may be
said they are highly expedient; for when they are prudently
chosen, they may be of unspeakable use to the persons bap
tized, and a great relief and comfort to the parents of them.
5. I answer, Secondly, it is too true that many undertake
this solemn office without ever considering what they under
take; giddy, ignorant persons, if not openly vicious, who
never once seriously think how to perform it. But whose
fault is this? It is not the fault of the Church, which care
fully guards against this very thing, by ordering “that none
but communicants be admitted to be godfathers or god
mothers.” Now, communicants we may presume to be
serious persons who will both consider and perform what they
undertake. It is altogether the fault of those foolish parents
who will, on any account whatever, either desire or suffer
those to be sponsors for their children, that do not take care
of their own souls. It is these inconsiderate and cruel men,
who have no compassion for their own flesh, that deprive their
children of all the benefits of this wise institution, and bring
a scandal on the institution itself, by their wicked abuse of it.
I therefore earnestly exhort all who have any concern, either
for their own or their children’s souls, at all hazards to
procure such persons to be sponsors, as truly fear God.
Regard not whether they are rich or poor; and if they are
poor, see that it be no expense to them. You will then tear
up by the roots one of the most plausible objections which
can be made against this primitive custom.
6. For, Thirdly, there is no reason why any truly serious
man should scruple to undertake the office. If you suppose
508 THoUGHTs conCERNING GoDFATHERs, &c.
godfathers and godmothers undertake what is impossible to
perform, you entirely mistake. And your mistake lies here:
You think they undertake what they do not. Do not you
think the sponsors themselves undertake or promise that the
child shall “renounce the devil and all his works, constantly
believe God's holy word, and obediently keep his command
ments?” Whereas in truth they neither undertake nor
promise any such thing. When they answer, “I renounce them
all,” “This I steadfastly believe,” “I will” (obediently keep
God’s holy will and commandments), they promise nothing at
all; they engage for nothing; it is another person that
promises all this. Whatever is then promised or undertaken,
it is not by them, but by the child. It is his part, not theirs.
So the Church tells you expressly: “This infant must for
his part promise.” It is he promises in these words, not
they. So again: “This child hath promised to renounce the
devil, to believe in God, and to serve him.” If it be said,
“But why are those questions inserted, which seem to mean
what they really do not?” I answer, I did not insert them,
and should not be sorry had they not been inserted at all.
I believe the compilers of our Liturgy inserted them because
they were used in all the ancient Liturgies. And their deep
reverence for the primitive Church made them excuse some
impropriety of expression.
7. What theri is your part, who are sponsors for the child?
This likewise is expressly told you: “It is your part to see
that this infant be taught, so soon as he shall be able to learn,
what a solemn vow, promise, and profession he hath here
made by you. You shall call upon him to hear sermons, and
shall provide that he may learn the Creed, the Lord’s Prayer,
and the Ten Commandments, and all other things which a
Christian ought to know and believe to his soul’s health;
and that this child may be virtuously brought up, to lead a
godly and a Christian life.”
8. Can anything then be plainer than what you do not,
and what you do, undertake? You do not undertake that he
shall renounce the devil and serve God; this the baptized
himself undertakes. You do undertake to see that he be
taught what things a Christian ought to know and believe.
And what is there in this which is impossible? which any
serious person may not perform ?
9. If then you that are parents will be so wise and kind to
THoUGHTS ON consECRATING CHURCHEs, &c. 509
your children as to wave every other consideration, and to
choose for their sponsors those persons alone who truly fear
and serve God; if some of you who love God, and love one
another, agree to perform this office of love for each other's
children; and if all you who undertake it perform it faith
fully, with all the wisdom and power God hath given you;
what a foundation of holiness and happiness may be laid,
even to your late posterity ! Then it may justly be hoped,
that not only you and your house, but also the children
which shall be born, shall serve the Lord.
ATHLoNE,
August 6, 1752.
T H O U G HTS
ON
THE CONSECRATION OF CHURCHES AND
BURIAL-GROUNDS.
1. It has been a custom for some ages, in Roman Catholic
countries, to have a particular form of consecration for all
churches and chapels: And not for these only, but for every
thing pertaining to them; such as fonts, chalices, bells, sacer
dotal vestments, and churchyards in particular. And all
these customs universally prevailed in England, as long as it
was under the Papal power.
2. From the time of our Reformation from Popery, most
of these customs fell into disuse. Unconsecrated bells
were rung without scruple, and unconsecrated vestments
worn. But some of them remained still ; the consecration of
churches and churchyards in particular; and many scrupled
the performing divine service in an unconsecrated church,
5]:0 THOUGHTS ON THE CONSECRATION
and could not consent that their bodies should be buried in
unconsecrated ground.
3. Accordingly, the consecrating of churches and church
yards has been practised in England ever since. But it is
a thing purely indifferent, being neither forbidden nor
established by law. The case is different in Ireland. While
the Earl of Strafford was Lord Lieutenant of that kingdom,
a law was made for the consecration, not only of churches,
but of churchyards also. And a form of consecration for
both was inserted in the Common Prayer-Book, which is
used at this day; much resembling that which Archbishop
Laud used in the consecration of St. Katherine Creed's
church, in London.
4. But such a law has never passed in England, much less
been inserted in our Common Prayer-Book. However, such
consecration has been generally practised, though not autho
rized by the legislature. “Is it then illegal?” That word is
capable of a twofold meaning. It may mean, either, without
any law in its favour, or, against law. I do not conceive it to
be illegal in the latter sense. Perhaps it is in the former: I
do not know any law that enjoins or even permits it.
5. And certainly, as it is not enjoined by the law of the
land, so it is not enjoined by the law of God. Where do we
find one word in the New Testament enjoining any such
thing? Neither do I remember any precedent of it in the
purest ages of the Church. It seems to have entered, and
gradually spread itself, with the other innovations and super
stitions of the Church of Rome. “Do you think it, then, a
superstitious practice?” Perhaps it is not, if it be practised
as a thing indifferent. But if it be done as a necessary
thing, then it is flatly superstitious.
6. For this reason I never wished that any Bishop should
consecrate any chapel or burial-ground of mine. Indeed, I
should not dare to suffer it; as I am clearly persuaded the
thing is wrong in itself, being not authorized either by any law
of God, or by any law of the land. In consequence of which,
I conceive, that either the clerk or the sexton may as well
consecrate the church or the churchyard, as the Bishop.
7. With regard to the latter, the churchyard, I know not
who could answer that plain question: “You say, this is
consecrated ground, so many feet broad, and so many long.
But pray how deep is the consecrated ground?”—“Deep !
OF CHURCHES AND BURIAL-GROUNDS. 511
What does that signify?” O, a great deal: For if my grave
be dug too deep, I may happen to get out of the consecrated
ground: And who can tell what unhappy consequences may
follow from this?
8. I take the whole of this practice to be a mere relic
of Romish superstition. And I wonder that any sensible
Protestant should think it right to countenance it; much
more, that any reasonable man should plead for the necessity
of it ! Surely, it is high time now that we should be guided,
not by custom, but by Scripture and reason.
DUMFRIEs,
May 14, 1788.